Ephesians 1:3-6: Blessing of Predestination to Adoption Through Christ
March 24, 2020

3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, 4 even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him.

In love 5 he predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will, 6 to the praise of his glorious grace, with which he has blessed us in the Beloved.



*** Please read the verses and pray through it before reading our own takes. ***




We see that in verse 3, the blessing that Paul gives does not bless the Church directly, but blesses the Father who has blessed us. Specifically, Paul actually glorifies God as the one who is deserving of all blessings with his usage of the Greek there (eulogetos). You can almost think of it as Paul blessing and commanding, “Bless the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

So why is God deserving of blessings? Why is He deserving of all our worship and praise?

First, it is because He is God. Specifically, He is not just a god, but He is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ. We Christians see Jesus as not only a good teacher, or a worldly king, but as our one true God. If so, and if this God that Paul blesses is God as well, we are talking about the same God. Those who say they put their faith in Jesus must also put their faith in God the Father as well for the two testify of each other (John 5:37,39).

Secondly, it is because He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore He is our Father as well. Jesus, by His work on the cross, has made it possible for us to be called His brothers (Hebrews 2:11), and thereby allowed for us to be able to call God the Father our Father as we have been called sons in verse 5 (Romans 8:16-17).

Thirdly, it is because He sent Jesus to bless us with “every spiritual blessing” (verse 3). That is to say, we have been blessed in Christ — through Jesus we have received “every spiritual blessing.” What wonderful news that is! That we need not work for every blessing that is available to us, that we need not through our vain works seek out holiness and blamelessness that we cannot possibly obtain through our own merit, but that we have been “chosen” to be saved by Christ and to be “holy and blameless before him” (verse 4).

Our blessing, the same blessing Paul wants to remind the Ephesians of, the one that we have received so freely, is the blessing of Christ Himself from whom we have received every blessing imaginable. What greater joy than to receive God Himself?

Not only that, God did this without condition, before we did anything good or bad, through predestination from “before the foundation of the world” (verse 4). It was not our works that allowed us to be adopted from our fallen nature, but rather that He did it “in love [...] according to the purpose of His will” (verse 5). God the Father, in love, sent His Beloved who showed perfect love on the cross, so that we may know His love shown to the Son as the Father loves the Son and may become His beloved.

That leads us to the final reason why we must bless the Father and why we are blessed to be able to do so.

God did it all, for “the praise of his glorious grace” (verse 6). God created the world — even its foundation, created us — who would sin against Him, sent down Jesus — who would die on the cross for our sins and resurrect, and built the Church, for the praise of Himself. We praise God and bless our God because as we have seen above, we have been given enough reasons to do so — and it is our blessing to do so.

Brothers and sisters, as we are children of the one God (verse 5), let us, even in times when it feels like we are separated from the rest of our siblings, to worship together in spirit to our God and Father.

Consider

How can you worship God today? How have you already done so?

Do we take Jesus for granted? Have we ever considered Him as our blessing Himself — not just looked for His blessings?

Let’s just take some time to thank God.