Ephesians 1:11-14: Guarantee of Our Inheritance
March 26, 2020

11 In him we have obtained an inheritance, having been predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his will, 12 so that we who were the first to hope in Christ might be to the praise of his glory. 13 In him you also, when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, 14 who is the guarantee of our inheritance until we acquire possession of it, to the praise of his glory.

*** Please read the verses and pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In verse 11, Paul moves to the inheritance that we have obtained in Him. This can be translated in two ways given the Greek form of the writing: 

(1) We are made to be an inheritance. That is, we are God’s inheritance to Jesus. We must realize that Jesus has bought us for a price, and we are now His. When we struggle with ideas of self-worth, or when we want to live as we please, let us remember that we were bought with a price. And when we are tempted to hold our brothers and sisters in contempt, let us remember that they, too, were bought with a price. 

This is not because of anything that we have done, but because of God’s grace. We only enjoy this in Him. 

(2) Christ is our inheritance, and everything that He inherits we also inherit. We must realize that we truly have it all in Christ, to no merit of our own, but rather because of God’s grace. There is nothing more to gain than Jesus. 

Note that in verse 11, Paul says that we have obtained this inheritance, but verse 14 suggests that we have yet to acquire possession of it. How do we make sense of this? This is the common theme of “already, but not yet” in the Bible. It is true that we already have this inheritance, that we belong to Jesus and Jesus belongs to us. However, the inheritance that we have yet to receive is the heavenly inheritance, the unfading crown that we will receive when we come to die. 

Furthermore, this inheritance is guaranteed, and Paul gives two assuring reasons: 

(1) God, the One who works all things according to the counsel of his will, actually predestined this inheritance. He did not randomly decide to give it to us, but the unchanging and everlasting God planned this from the start for the praise of His glory. 

(2) God gives us the Holy Spirit. As we continue to be led by the Spirit, we know that we are the children of God. Our inheritance is confirmed and guaranteed, and we are “sealed.” This means that we are authenticated as God’s possession. And the Holy Spirit dwelling in us is proof to ourselves and to others of this possession. 

Brothers and sisters, we have a great inheritance that can never be lost, for God is unchanging and His Word does not fail. Though promises and guarantees in this world mean little, we can trust in the sovereign God. 

In this season of sickness when it seems that everything, such as friends, was swept away in an instant, let us be reminded that earthly possessions rot away, but heavenly possessions can never be lost. 


Consider

What do we look forward to the most? Is it Christ himself?

How often do we recall what God has done for us? Do we do this even in times of bitterness or sadness? 

Let us thank God today for what He has done for us. 