Ephesians 1:15-18: Enlightening the Eyes of the Heart
March 27, 2020

15 For this reason, because I have heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love toward all 
the saints, 16 I do not cease to give thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers, 17 that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him, 18 having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope to which he has called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints,

*** Please read the verses and pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Paul, despite writing this letter in prison, considers the saints in Ephesus and is filled with great thankfulness. Why is he so thankful despite his dreary circumstance? Paul explains in v15 that it is because firstly “I have heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus” and secondly “your love towards all the saints”. Simply put, the saints in Ephesus bear the marks of a true Christian - someone who both genuinely believes in the Lord Jesus and genuinely loves others as a result. 

In other words, Paul is thankful God has saved other Christians, whether he knows them directly or not. Simply the existence of other believers, whether as our friends if we are lucky, or as fellow saints around the world, should compel us to come to God in thankfulness. 

For one, we know that it is by the grace of God that allows our brothers and sisters to have faith. But moreover, we can enjoy being part of a greater body. Even when Paul’s individual circumstances seem hopeless on the surface, the greater body is still making much progress under God’s authority. Paul doesn’t forget that the restoration of the Kingdom of God is led by Christ as He works through all the saints and not merely himself. 

That very fact that God chose to elect and save a multitude of other saints who share the same purpose as you and should be an encouragement, especially if you can fellowship with them in person! Thus in v16, Paul ceaselessly expresses thankfulness knowing that God has provided other Christians to share in bringing Him glory and partake in embodying a community of love.

Because of this encouragement, Paul is compelled to love those very saints by interceding for them through prayer. What does Paul pray for them to have? In v17, Paul specifically prays that the saints in Ephesus may have a “Spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him”. Paul asks that they may know God, which is intricately tied with glorifying and enjoying Him. The more we know of God, the more we are filled with awe; as Romans 11:33 proclaims, “Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God!”. 

This reveals that praying to know God is not meant to be exclusively for new Christians. In fact, it is normal for a Christian’s heart to have an incomplete picture of God’s attributes. v15 clearly shows that Paul is writing to mature Christians who both have faith and are exhibiting the fruit of the Spirit. Yet Paul still prays that they may know God. Why? Because knowing God is an infinite process of continual enriching. 

Frankly, we will never know God or his attributes completely on Earth. However, our understanding of Him can deepen day by day. What pops into our mind when we imagine “riches” or which truths inspire us with hope become ever more refined and polished as we mature. As we taste new angles of the glories of God, we recognize not only that God is so awesome, but that God is vastly more awesome in ways we do not yet know but will come to know in eternity. v17 explains how this is only possible through the Holy Spirit that is commissioned by the “Father of glory”. It is this Holy Spirit, which reprograms our broken conscience through sanctification, that gives us the ability to know anything about God.

Paul prays in v18 that the Spirit will make the “eyes of your hearts enlightened”. What do Christians mean by the heart? Or the “eyes of your heart”? The heart is who we truly are and the core from which our decisions spawn. It is the inner being that resides alongside our flesh and bones. Much like how our flesh and bones are natural, and our heart supernatural, the eyes of our heart is our perception towards spiritual realities. This is why Jesus says in Matthew 13:13 “seeing they do not see”. Just like a Pharisee, there are many things we may know in our head or see with the eyes on our face but not truly grasp in our heart or perceive with the eyes on our heart. This deeper heart understanding is only possible through the Helper given to us. 

Paul prays in v18 that God may open the “eyes of our hearts” to truly know several important spiritual truths: “the hope to which he has called you” and “the riches of his glorious inheritance”. 

There are infinitely many great hopes in the Bible for the eyes of our hearts to be opened to. For example, to name one: 1 Peter says that our inheritance “can never perish, spoil or fade”. In fact “this inheritance is kept in heaven for you” - even your ability to have faith is shielded by God’s power! Paul is praying that truths like this would not only be known by the mind, but also penetrate the heart.  

Furthermore, Paul prays for an understanding of “the riches of his glorious inheritance”. It ought to cause our hearts to leap with more joy than if we had just received a million dollars! Yet this is often not the case. Our imperfect hearts do not fully comprehend how much greater and more worthwhile heaven is compared to Earth. However, the more the Spirit opens the eyes of our hearts, the dimmer earthly treasures seem in comparison to heavenly things. 

Consider

How often do we give thanks to God for the fellow brothers and sisters in our lives? Do we take them for granted? Do we idolize them or seek their approval above God?

Are Biblical truths dull to you? Is it all simply head-knowledge or do these truths invorage your heart? Do you consistently pray for the Spirit to reveal Biblical truths to your heart? If not, imitate Paul and commit to this prayer!