Ephesians 2:4-7: God’s grace upon grace
March 30, 2020

4 But God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us, 5 even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ—by grace you have been saved— 6 and raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, 7 so that in the coming ages he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***




From the last three verses, we learned that we were dead — that is, completely devoid of any good and therefore deserving of only the wrath of God.

Yet, God was “rich in mercy.” Why? — “because of the great love with which he loved us” (verse 1). The love here, within the context, is specifically the saving love of God (God’s love of complacency). This is the unconditional love of God that is given to us “even when we were dead in our trespasses” (verse 5).

In this mercy, God “made us alive together with Christ” in His mercy when God “raised us up with him” (verse 5, 6). Through the death of Christ, we died with Him (2 Corinthians 5:14-15) and became dead to sin (Romans 6:10-11) in Him, and by death to sin, from our death in sin, we have been raised up with Christ.

This is grace — that we who did not deserve any reward (but rather deserved punishment!) received resurrection from the dead to be seated with God “in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus” (verse 6). What a scandalous idea! Not only are we delivered from our punishment, but we are glorified as to be seated with Christ — that is, “at the right hand of the throne of God” (Hebrews 12:2).

Why did God do any of this? We’ve already covered that God saves us in mercy which is abundant because of His love, through the grace of Christ, but all for what?

It is quite simply to show the “immeasurable riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus” (verse 7). In an almost circular fashion, God saved us by grace to show that He is a gracious God. God, in His actions, reflects His very character because that is who He is. God does not commit acts of grace because He has to fit a certain standard, but He does so because in His very nature, He is the epitome of the fullness of grace. Therefore, because He is the epitome of the fullness of grace, God subjects Himself in flesh to the world so that we may receive grace upon (or through) grace (John 1:16).

God, in His kindness, showed the “immeasurable riches of his grace” by showing Himself and raising us to Himself.

What good news that is. Not only that we were delivered from the state of destruction we were in, but that we are seated with the Son of God Himself. For us who have this assurance and the hope thereof, can rest soundly knowing that God is with us and that one day we will see Him in a new body. This is why despite what condition we may be in, we can “hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful.” (Hebrews 10:23).

Consider

How have we been merciful and kind to others knowing the extent of grace shown to us through Christ?

What does it mean that we have been raised with Christ?

“In the coming ages” can mean both now and the Second Coming. How do we hope for more of God’s grace to be realized in our lives? Is God our greatest hope?