Ephesians 2:8-10: Grace through faith
March 31, 2020

8 For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, 9 not a result of works, so that no one may boast. 10 For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



We talk about faith a lot in Christianity. Yet, when a Christian thinks of faith, and when someone asks “how is your faith?”, the Christian might instinctively just say something along the lines of: “It’s been good. I have been reading my Bible, praying a lot, etc…”. At times, faith for the Christian might become just a laundry list of spiritual practices he/she might have been able to do in the past week. Yet, this is not the way the Bible describes faith, and not the way Paul describes faith here in this passage.

For faith, as seen in verse 8, is the means by which we are saved, and the means by which continue in our race (Colossians 1:23).

Saving faith, as we know it, is not merely an intellectual consent (a head knowledge) to the elements and narrative of the Gospel, but a full assent of the heart, the soul, the mind, and as a result the body to the works of Christ that have secured our salvation. Those who read the devotional for Ephesians 1 - 3 should now realize something is very problematic about this statement. We learned that we were dead in our sins and therefore hated all things God — how can we assent to something we despise?

It is possible because even faith in itself is the grace (undeserved gift) of God presented to us through Jesus Christ that we have not worked toward or achieved (verse 8). What that means is that even our faith to believe in the works of Christ has not come from ourselves but it is born from the regeneration (a fundamental transformation of our being) that God gifts us with in our baptism of water and Spirit (John 3:1-8).

Faith is not something that we have arrived at through our understanding, nor is it the result of a certain amount of Herculean work that we have completed. Rather, we cannot boast about our faith because it is something given to us freely (verse 9). If we were to boast about our faith, it would only be of the giver of the gift of faith, namely Christ Himself who authored it.

However, this does not mean that we are not to do any good works. No, contrarily, Paul states in verse 10 that we are “created in Christ Jesus for good works”. Yet, this is wrapped around the statement: “we are his workmanship [...] which God prepared beforehand” to show that God is the one who prepares us through His work (workmanship) in both the creation and in the work of the cross. We have faith in the God who created us, saved us, and lives in us to have prepared us for all the good works that we are meant to do. Not only can we do good works (different from whence we could not), but we are created to do good works.

So, how can we answer the question, “how is your faith?” It’s not necessarily wrong to answer with what kinds of spiritual practices you have been practicing. However, if you end it with just that, you may not have fully understood the question. Rather, we should wonder about why and how that spiritual practice has influenced our hope and faith thereof (or how we are struggling through it).

Consider

1. State in your own words, what you believe in your faith

2. How is your faith?