Ezra 2:59-63: The Unproven 

July 10, 2020

59 The following were those who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan, and Immer, though they could not prove their fathers' houses or their descent, whether they belonged to Israel: 60 the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, and the sons of Nekoda, 652. 61 Also, of the sons of the priests: the sons of Habaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, and the sons of Barzillai (who had taken a wife from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called by their name). 62 These sought their registration among those enrolled in the genealogies, but they were not found there, and so they were excluded from the priesthood as unclean. 63 The governor told them that they were not to partake of the most holy food, until there should be a priest to consult Urim and Thummim.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


We see from today’s devotional just how important genealogy is to the people of God. This passage lists out people who have lost track of their heritage. Generally speaking, most of the exiles seem to have remembered their genealogy because we see that each person returns to his own city. However, verses 59-60 show that there were 652 people who “could not prove their fathers’ houses or their descent”. 


Being part of the covenant family of God was very important. God chose the patriarchs to establish a family that would be set apart and become a holy nation. They were to represent the Kingdom of God. Part of this was demonstrating that belonging to God was exclusive to those who believed in Him and walked by His Law. Thus, losing their genealogy demonstrates how apathetic the Jews were towards clinging on to their role as God’s chosen nation. 


In verses 61-62, we see that some priests “sought their registration among those enrolled in the genealogies, but they were not found there”. Because their genealogy was uncertain, they were prohibited from the priesthood and considered to be unclean. Here we see just how carefully the Jews treated the law - if it was not absolutely certain that they were part of the priestly lineage, they could not partake in priestly activities. So in order to fix this, verse 63 says that they should consult Urim and Thummim. According to Leviticus 8:8, these were components of the garment of the high priest used to seek the Lord’s will.


The fact that even the priestly lineage had been spoiled shows that Israel had truly lost its proper structure of worship. Brothers and sisters, is our place in the family of God something we take for granted? This was so important to the Jews that they could list their ancestors many generations back; but today, we can’t even read through a passage about genealogies without groaning in boredom! 


Let us praise God for establishing a permanent family structure in Christ through His Church. For we who are born again by the power of the Holy Spirit have full assurance that we are part of the family of God. We need not meticulously trace back our ancestry tree. Simply look to the cross, where our Father “predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through Jesus Christ” (Eph. 1:5)! 


Consider


1. Is your part in the family of God something you take for granted? As you read through lists and genealogies in Scripture, remember that through Christ, you have been grafted into His tree of everlasting life!