Ezra 1:1: Stirring the Heart of the King
July 1, 2020

1 In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom and also put it in writing:

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

We often pray for God to move within our lives, asking Him to change our hearts and renew our minds to serve and love Him more. We also often pray for God to move in the hearts of those around us, both believers and non-believers. 

But how often do we pray for God to move in the hearts of those in authority? How often do we pray for God to move in the heart of Chris Eisgruber? How often do we pray for God to move in the heart of our local government leaders? How often do we pray for God to move in the heart of President Trump? 
It can be so easy for us to rule out the possibility of God working in and through certain people. Whether it is politicians, school authorities, or even hardened family members, we often find ourselves being discouraged by their actions rather than praying for them. We somehow think that because they have shown a disregard for God, that God is limited in His power to work through them. 

In today’s passage, we see that God “stirred up” the heart of King Cyrus in order to send the Jews back from exile. Isaiah 45:4 tells us that Cyrus did not know God, so this was not as though Cyrus was being moved by his own righteous convictions. This was God working through the heart of the foreign king. 

But what is more important to understand is why God worked through the heart of King Cyrus. Verse 1 tells us very clearly that it is that the “word of the Lord might be fulfilled.” God had a perfect plan of redemption for Judah from the very beginning of time, and there was no doubt that it would come to pass. Let us never forget that everything in the universe must bow to the will of the Father. 

Brothers and sisters, what a great encouragement this is! The God we serve is one whose every word will be fulfilled. The God we serve is one whose will comes to pass with more certainty than the rising of the sun. Let us remind ourselves this morning of the power and the authority of our Lord, and that there is nothing that happens to us that is outside of our Father’s will. 

Therefore, let us pray fervently with great hope and expectation for those that we would not often pray for. Let us pray for those in authority (1 Timothy 2:1-2), let us pray for our hardened and unrepentant family members and friends, let us pray for our bosses and coworkers. 

And when we do pray, let us pray as our Lord taught us to pray: “Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.”

Consider

1. Do you pray for those in authority/leadership positions? 
2. Do you place limits on the ways in which God can work? 