Ezra 2:70: Remembering Their Promised Land

July 12, 2020


70 Now the priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants lived in their towns, and all the rest of Israel in their towns.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


I hope that this one verse is a welcome sight after reading all those names and numbers.


God had brought the Israelites back to their promised land and the Israelites remembered it and now were able to enjoy it.


The priest and Levites and some other people along with them went to the cities that the Levites were given scattered throughout Israel— they were not given their own allotment of land in Israel and were instead gifted cities within other tribes’ allotments. Meanwhile, the rest of Israel went back to their remembered homelands to enjoy their inheritance once again.


A lot of us can attest to the joy of being home and enjoying the homecooking of our parents or the simple pleasure of knowing that we are at a place that we feel like we belong to. This joy, I assume, was what these Israelites returning from their exile must have felt. They may have been delighted at the idea that now they were able to work the farmlands and pastures that their ancestors had procured and God had restored for them.


The Israelites had their towns.


They had a place to call home even when they were exiled in a foreign land. They knew where they really belonged and had a sense of belonging when they finally arrived at that location. Because the land was promised to them and because the land was guaranteed to be theirs by the word of God Himself, Israelites were secure in their blessings of the land.


For those who know the feeling of home, it is a blessing of God that you get to feel it.


Though many of us many understand the joy these Israelites may have felt, many of us also cannot. Perhaps, we have never known where this place called “home” was supposed to be, or perhaps, we never felt so “at home” in those places people called “home”, or perhaps, we are sick of our homes and do not want to be home.


For those of us who feel this way, there is hope. There is a promise for the weary traveller who wants to rest his head, but cannot find a place on earth. There is the promise that Jacob saw when he rested his head on a rock at Bethel. There is the promise of the gateway to heaven through Jesus Christ, and the home we have access to through the Way.


Here, we are exiles hoping and waiting for our call back home, but at home, in the clear presence of God, we will have the satisfaction and fullness of endless joy that we so look forward to. I imagine we will be as these Israelites. When we arrive at the golden shores of eternity, when we look upon the new heavens and the new earth, we will no longer feel lost or “not at home”. We will see the light of the Son of God rising as the sun and realize in His light that we are shining in our joy and satisfaction as well.


These Israelites had a great inheritance awaiting them in Israel, and when they entered into their towns, they would have rejoiced in the faithfulness of God. For the Christian, an even greater allotment and inheritance awaits. For the Christian, what is guaranteed is more than the perishing lands of this old earth, but the eternal, everlasting allotment in the new garden.


Often enough, we are easily caught up with the passing world. We dedicate ourselves to the improvement of this dying world without setting our eyes on the eternal. This is not to say we should not do any good for the world, but we must do all good for the sake of the expansion of the Kingdom of God through the propagation of the Gospel that we have been entrusted with. We must take care that we are not building a kingdom of sand that will be swept up in the wave of judgement day.


I hope that none of us, one step into eternity, will regret that we should have spent more time building up the Kingdom of God rather than the kingdom of man.


We have a home on the other side of eternity, and for those of us who have experienced the worldly joy of a home have had a foretaste of it, and those of us who lack it are blessed with the longing we ought to feel for the paradise Jesus promises.


Consider


1. Do we build up the kingdom of man that lacks any Gospel impact and advancement?

2. Do we long for eternity with God?