Ezra 3:2-3: Worshipping in Danger

July 14, 2020


2 Then arose Jeshua the son of Jozadak, with his fellow priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel with his kinsmen, and they built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man of God. 3 They set the altar in its place, for fear was on them because of the peoples of the lands, and they offered burnt offerings on it to the Lord, burnt offerings morning and evening. 

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In these two verses, we see the significance of worship and sacrifice to God. 


As noted in verse 2, Jeshua the high priest along with Zerubbabel begin the rebuilding project with the altar for offerings. It is no coincidence that the altar is the first work that is rebuilt. While it is logistically easier to build in comparison to an entire temple, the deeper reason as to why it was built first lies in the second half of verse 2, “the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man of God.”


At the altar, the Israelites would provide offerings for atonement of their sins. Hence rebuilding the altar first signifies the need for God’s mercy and forgiveness to a sinful nation. This obedience and dedication to God is a very important theme we as Christians should also apply in our lives through everything that we do even if it is offering the first 10% of the money we receive to God.


Now continuing to verse 3, we encounter a significant and exemplary action from the Israelites. In yesterday’s devotional, Handa elaborated on the importance and reason for coming together as one: to know who God is and to worship him properly. Given that understanding of unity here with the Israelites, the beginning portion of verse 3 is further magnified, “for fear was on them because of the peoples of the land, and they offered burnt offerings.”


The Israelites were not surrounded by allies but rather other idolatrous nations that staunchly opposed this form of pure religion. Following through with their worship without a doubt puts them at risk of danger and could actually lead to severe ramifications. Yet even with this inevitable fear, the Israelites act in a way that should be a model for all of us: they still sacrificed their offerings to God. 


As a Christian, you will definitely face moments in life when you may be fearful of the world around you, whether it be physical danger or being publicly ostracized, since the gospel will be offensive to the world. Understanding this, I exhort you to remain steadfast in the word rather than conform to a message that is more appealing to the world. 


At times fear as a natural response to a situation may be hard to control but the important point of today’s devotional is to reflect on how the Israelites responded and hence how we should also respond. Worshipping God and offering sacrifices before him is not an action that is reserved for when you are feeling good. Obedience to God is done regardless of the situation and how you are feeling. 


Unity with other brothers and sisters in the body of Christ will definitely help when you face fear. Fighting the good fight along with other brothers and sisters will not only sharpen you but keep you on the right path. So let us all trust and glorify God, fearing him more than man. 


Consider

1. Has it ever been difficult to worship or offer a sacrifice to God because of something in your life?

2. How have brothers and sisters in your life played a role in fighting the good fight?