Ezra 2:64-69: The Remnant Assemble to Worship

July 11, 2020

64 The whole assembly together was 42,360, 65 besides their male and female servants, of whom there were 7,337, and they had 200 male and female singers. 66 Their horses were 736, their mules were 245, 67 their camels were 435, and their donkeys were 6,720.

68 Some of the heads of families, when they came to the house of the Lord that is in Jerusalem, made freewill offerings for the house of God, to erect it on its site. 69 According to their ability they gave to the treasury of the work 61,000 darics of gold, 5,000 minas of silver, and 100 priests' garments.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Brothers and sisters, let us not forget the power of God’s will. Who can stand against it? We see in verse 64 that He brought a whole assembly of 42,360 of His remnant out of their captivity. Including servants and singers, verse 65 shows that the size of this entire group was roughly 50,000 people. Finally, the remnant has assembled, ready to rebuild God’s temple and restore a place for proper worship.



What is the first thing that these people did when they got back? Verses 68-69 tell us that they returned to where the Temple of God used to be and began to offer their gifts willingly so that it may be restored. This is a powerful reminder of what happened when the Tabernacle was first built. In Exodus 36:2-6, God stirred in the hearts of the Israelites to use their skills and their freewill offerings for His glory. The Bible tells us that there were craftsmen doing every sort of task and there were offerings more than enough for doing the work that the Lord had commanded.



Likewise, we see here all the people gathered, pouring themselves out in service. Whether it be priests or singers or doorkeepers, people gifted in various sorts of tasks came to restore this place of worship. Brothers and sisters, God is still calling us to build His Church today. What do we have to offer Him? Even now, we are called to be cheerful givers; as Paul writes in 2 Corinthians 9:7, “each one must give as he has decided in his heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver”. Let us give as we rejoice in building up His Church.



Do not forget that those who returned to Jerusalem were merely the remnant God had stirred. As the early historian Josephus wrote, “many remained in Babylon, being unwilling to leave their possessions”. It would be wrong to think that those who stayed in Babylon lacked any form of spiritual life. Some still studied the Law and followed their traditions, but those whom God had stirred longed for something deeper. 



Brothers and sisters, we can easily enter into a routine of church attendance and daily devotionals but have the heart of those who remained in captivity. Examine yourself and ask: am I merely living a spiritual life, or am I living in true worship? Our aim in worship is not to evoke a sense of fulfillment, but to meet with God and respond in a way that radiates His glory! Let us come together, freely offer our lives to Christ, and build a Church that gives Him the worship that He deserves!



Consider



1. God calls us to build His Church - are you offering anything for this purpose? Are you doing this in good cheer?

2. Are we as a body of believers properly mimicking what we see in this passage? 