Ephesians 3:17-19: Fullness in Love
April 9, 2020

17 so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith—that you, being rooted and grounded in love, 18 may have strength to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, 19 and to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Paul continues his prayer for the enablement and strengthening of the Ephesians. In verse 17, Paul prays that “Christ may dwell in [our] hearts through faith.” This is interesting because Paul is writing to Christians, in whom Christ already dwells. But what Paul is talking about is the continual and growing indwelling of Christ’s power in our lives. We must realize, brothers and sisters, that Jesus is not someone that we simply “accept,” only for us to continue to live as we please. Rather, He must become increasingly present in our hearts. 

And this brings about a growth in our understanding of how great Christ’s love for us is. And we need “strength to comprehend” this love because it is just so unbelievably great that it “surpasses knowledge.” Have we begun to comprehend this unimaginable love? Or do we remain relatively unmoved? 

As Jonathan Edwards puts it, we must have both light and heat with respect to the love of Christ. We must have the “light” in the sense that we grow in our knowledge and understanding of this love. But we must also have the “heat” — the passion that comes with this true understanding. 

Brothers and sisters, what better time is there than right now, during this Passion Week, for us to pray as Paul did for a greater understanding of Christ’s love? What could be a better use of our days than growing in our knowledge of so great a love? Let us continue to meditate on this love until we are burning with passion and gratitude for the Lord. 

What does this all lead to? If we look at verse 19, Paul says that we will be “filled with all the fullness of God.” There is truly nothing more to gain or to get than this fullness and satisfaction. That is what fullness means! And yet, we are so bent on finding our fullness and satisfaction elsewhere. This morning, let us remind ourselves of Christ’s great love for us and be filled with the fullness of God, not the emptiness of this world. 


Consider
1. Do we have both the heat and the light?
2. Are we filled with the fullness of God or are seeking to fill ourselves with other things? 
3. Let us meditate on the greatness of Christ’s love this morning. 