Ezra 2:43-58: The Servants

July 9, 2020

43 The temple servants: the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth, 44 the sons of Keros, the sons of Siaha, the sons of Padon, 45 the sons of Lebanah, the sons of Hagabah, the sons of Akkub, 46 the sons of Hagab, the sons of Shamlai, the sons of Hanan, 47 the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar, the sons of Reaiah, 48 the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda, the sons of Gazzam, 49 the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah, the sons of Besai, 50 the sons of Asnah, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephisim, 51 the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur, 52 the sons of Bazluth, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha, 53 the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah, 54 the sons of Neziah, and the sons of Hatipha.

55 The sons of Solomon's servants: the sons of Sotai, the sons of Hassophereth, the sons of Peruda, 56 the sons of Jaalah, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel, 57 the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, and the sons of Ami.

58 All the temple servants and the sons of Solomon's servants were 392.

 

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In the past few devotionals, we read through the men, priests, and Levites that returned to Jerusalem from Babylon. Today, we see the temple servants that returned from exile, but the focus of this passage is not actually on the servants themselves. In fact, the focus of this entire section is not on those that returned from exile, but rather on God’s covenant faithfulness. 


We see from the Jewish people returning from exile that God was faithful to His promise to restore His covenant people. The passage is actually highlighting this faithfulness, and this provides great insight into how we as Christians should view service to God.


That is, our service to God should not highlight our own goodness or piety, but rather the glory and the goodness of God. There was no doubt that the temple servants had made a difficult decision in leaving the comfort of their lives in Babylon in order to go serve God in their deserted homeland. There was no doubt that the temple servants had countless responsibilities in order to help facilitate the worship of God. And yet, the passage does not touch on this at all because the glory is not to be bestowed upon the servants, but rather upon the one who is served: God. 


Brothers and sisters, let us examine our hearts when we serve the Lord. Do we truly do everything for the sake of God’s glory and His kingdom, or is there some part of us that desires recognition for our service? Do we act differently when there are people watching, or do we live as those who know that they are always seen by their Father above? Do we even have a heart of service at all? 


But what is astounding in all of this is the fact that the passage still recognizes the service of the temple servants by listing the families they are from. Though the focus is on God’s goodness and faithfulness, God Himself recognizes and remembers each temple servant for their service to Him. 


Though the tasks of the temple servants may seem less glamorous or prestigious than that of the priests or Levites, they are still named and recognized by God. Let us read this and realize that God does not care for the things that this world cares about in status or prestige. Rather, our God seeks and honors those that humbly and faithfully offer themselves to Him. 


Therefore, let each one of us commit everything that we do to the glory of God. Though we might think that we have less to offer to God because we don’t have certain internships or talents, let us not forget that our God simply asks that we dedicate ourselves to Him, for He is not one who is limited by the abilities of the ones that serve Him. 


This morning, may we serve God and God alone. 


 

Consider


1. Do you have a desire for recognition in your works, or do you desire that God be glorified? 

2. Is the recognition of man or God more important to you?