Ephesians 2:18-22: A Unified Temple of the Triune God 
April 3, 2020

18 For through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father. 19 So then you are no longer strangers and aliens, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God, 20 built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone, 21 in whom the whole structure, being joined together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord. 22 In him you also are being built together into a dwelling place for God by the Spirit.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

These verses flow from the main idea of the past two devotionals (reread v11-v17): We Gentiles, who were once strangers to God, now have a covenant with God! We are united with Jews to become a new (Christain) man because of the blood of Christ. 

Verse 18 summarizes our Covenant like this: “through him (Christ) we both (Jew and Gentile) have access in one Spirit (Holy Spirit) to the Father (God).” This sentence so concisely and precisely describes our relationship with God by pointing to his triune nature. Meditate on this verse. It’s as if the sentence just said “God’s nature” and “us” but beautifully interlaced the two together with words, entangling us with the trinity. Do you see how our relationship with the triune God knits together in every aspect of Christian life? 

Think about prayer. Even our petitions are filled with pride and ignorance for we do not know how to pray as we ought (Rom. 8:26). Yet the Spirit searches our hearts and guides us according to the Father’s will (Rom. 8:27). On top of that, the Spirit and the Son intercedes for us (Rom. 8:27, 34) - our prayers are joined with their perfect prayers! 

Or think about worship. Our worship is still tainted by competing desires from our sinful hearts. Yet because of the Spirit, we are in Christ! Christ, who said “I glorified you on earth, having accomplished the work that you gave me to do” (John. 17:4) poured himself out in the perfect act of worship - our worship is offered with his perfect worship (because we are in him)! 

Our relationship with God is filled with this crucial “to the Father by the Son through the Holy Spirit” dynamic. We cannot know God if we do not know the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Notice how in v18 it says “we both”. Not only do you experience this, but you share in this experience with other Christians. These people may be as different from you as a Jew is to a Gentile. Yet all across the world, through different cultures and ethnic divides, v19 says we are united together as fellow citizens of the household of God. Think about how marvelous this is. USA, China, France, Korea, Nigeria, Colombia, Mexico, Russia - millions of different people yet one God! What other religion is so ethnically and culturally diverse, bringing together “strangers and aliens”? 

Yet how powerful is it that these ethnic tensions, which in history have erupted into catastrophic wars, can fellowship together because we share “one Spirit”? Together, Paul says we form the “fullness of him” (Eph. 1:23) by becoming a “holy temple in the Lord”. Paul tells us what this temple will be like in v20-22. This temple will never fall because v20 says it rests atop an unmovable cornerstone, Christ Jesus himself. This temple will be Holy because v22 says it is “a dwelling place for God”. This temple will be perfect because v21 says “the whole structure, being joined together, grows into a holy temple” not under the supervision of a human architect but rather by the power of the Holy Spirit, the “Spirit of life” (Rom. 8:2). 

What comes to mind when you hear the word “temple”? It likely resembles a building. Perhaps, we try imagining what Solomon’s temple looked like. But “temple” is nothing more than a dwelling place for God and a worship place for us. In Genesis 1, all creation was God’s temple! Genesis 3:8 says He “walked in the garden” and so God must have dwelled at Eden. This is the type of temple that God has restored for us and in us - one that fills His whole creation, but this time, in Christ, it will be vastly better than Eden. 

We Christians, from all across this world, have come together in unity to form the Church, the body of Christ, “like living stones” (1 Pet. 2:5), to glorify and enjoy our triune God and partake in manifesting the “fullness of him who fills all in all” (Eph. 1:23)!

Consider

1. Does the trinity matter to you? How would life be any different if God was unitarian? Spend some time meditating on God’s triune nature for that is who He is!

2. As a local body of believers, are we truly united in Christ or is something else the cornerstone of our temple? For instance, maybe this period of isolation could reveal that we have elevated social interactions above Christ while we were together. Spend some time in self-examination and prayer while enjoying the unity we share in Him!