Ezra 2:36-39: The Priests

July 7, 2020


36 The priests: the sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, 973. 37 The sons of Immer, 1,052. 38 The sons of Pashhur, 1,247.39 The sons of Harim, 1,017.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


These four verses note the priests that return to Jerusalem. Making up around 4,200 of the Israelites, the priests were a rather small group in comparison to the around 42,000 person company returning to Jerusalem. 


In context, under King David 24 priestly divisions were established but only four returned while many remained in Babylon. As our brother Handa mentioned in yesterday’s devotional on the men of Israel, these priests also had a trust and hope in the Lord to restore what was lost. 


While the common response to any difficulty or problem is to just trust God, the Israelites and specifically priests were not facing a trivial matter that could easily be shrugged off with some assurance by others.


Nebuchadnezzar’s complete destruction of Jerusalem and exile were among the most devastating problems the Israelites faced. Not only was the physical defeat completely demoralizing but the spiritual crisis they were now in made it too much to bear. It seemed clear that God promised them this land for their kingdom, but in the moment it felt like a very clear spiritual defeat. Psalms 137 accounts the deep anguish by the Israelites under captivity, “By the waters of Babylon, there we sat down and wept, when we remembered Zion.” Facing such harsh difficulties, one could inevitably think that all is lost. 


Even though exile and captivity could have possibly left many with a grave hopelessness for a restored kingdom, the priests mentioned in these four verses along with around 38,000 Israelites knew that God made a promise and would not forsake it. 


The circumstances of these priests can be an encouragement for those who abide in him. Just as the priests were called to serve the Lord and responsibly lead, we may be called, at times with great responsibility, to serve in various ways. While we cannot automatically attribute every desired outcome as a promise God will uphold, our trust can rest on the promise of purification and His glory, as we saw in 1 John. Let us remain steadfast in this promise even when the world evokes a hopelessness within us.


Consider


1. What does trusting God wholeheartedly look like in your life?

2. How has this affected your response to difficulties and problems in life?