Ephesians 4:4-6: Boldness in Christ
April 12, 2020

4 There is one body and one Spirit—just as you were called to the one hope that belongs to your call— 5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 6 one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all. 


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



In the last three verses, Paul emphasized heavily how we are to walk in love with one another. Here, in the next three verses, we see why we, the Church, must walk in unity with one another.

Paul here quite simply explains that the Church is one body and in the one Spirit (that is, the Holy Spirit) given to us by God because we all are “called to the one hope that belongs to your call” (verse 4) . To clarify, he is essentially saying that we were called to hope, and there is one hope that is within our calling. Within the calling (effectual calling to come to faith) is an embedded hope that binds the Church together to be one body no matter the backgrounds, status, and occupation. So, what exactly is this hope that belongs to our call?

Paul explains it in the next two verses in four steps, “one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all” (verse 5-6).

One Lord. Through the most costly transaction recorded in all history, we have been purchased (1 Corinthians 6:20), and we now have one Lord by whom we were called and must serve. His name is Jesus, and He is the Son of God. He has risen from the grace upon His fulfillment of all prophecies and covenants, and with His resurrection, He assured us as His people and Himself as the Lord over us, His people.

One faith. Because we have Christ Jesus as our Lord, we also have one faith in Him. Our faith is not in ourselves, our own flesh, and the works of our own hands, but is in the redeeming work of Christ upon the cross. Our faith is that Jesus Christ died once and for all for the sins of His Church and that the Church no longer are slaves to sin, but slaves to righteousness (Romans 6:17-18). We have been made heirs in God’s eyes.

One baptism. We have received the baptism of water and Spirit (John 3:5) and we who were dead in sin have now come alive in Christ. We are no longer dead beings walking in a world that is dead, but we are live beings bringing a dead world to life. By our repentance and receiving of God’s grace, we have been given a new life that we could not have imagined in our death before.

One God and Father of all. We have a God “who is over all” — He has the control over all things. Even in the darkest of times, when it seems like the storms of this life are rocking our ship back and forth with no sign of solid ground, God is still in control. We have a God who is “through all” — He is revealing Himself through all things, and is with us through all things. We have a God who is “in all” — in even the smallest of His mighty creation, His beauty and work is seen. This God, this magnificent, marvelous, and mighty God, is our Father. He looks at us as His children and listens to us for the sake of His begotten Son, Jesus.

If you have not noticed already, this is the Gospel.

Our hope is in the fact that there is victory. He is risen! He is risen indeed!

It’s Easter, brothers and sisters, and this is the greatest single day in our entire year, and the first Easter was our greatest day ever! Will you rejoice and be glad that we have all things, and the hope thereof, because of Jesus’s resurrection? As our passage suggests, this Easter Sunday, let us come together as one Body in the one Spirit! Though we are apart, in our hope we are together. We can hope together as we look forward to that one day when we will never be apart again.

I miss you all, and I am just glad that this separation will only make us to hope even more.

Consider

1. What do you hope for?