Ephesians 4:25-29: A Total Transformation
April 18, 2020

25 Therefore, having put away falsehood, let each one of you speak the truth with his neighbor, for we are members one of another. 26 Be angry and do not sin; do not let the sun go down on your anger, 27 and give no opportunity to the devil. 28 Let the thief no longer steal, but rather let him labor, doing honest work with his own hands, so that he may have something to share with anyone in need. 29 Let no corrupting talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for building up, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Paul has just finished addressing what we Christians are told to do as we learn Christ: we are to put off our old self and put on our new self. We put off our old self willingly because we recognize that the sins in which we once walked were like poison to us, corrupting us (Eph. 4:22). We then put on our new self, which is given freely to us through Christ, and we do this by setting our minds on spiritual things instead of worldly things (Eph. 4:23). Paul now goes into the practical implications of this, which is why he begins verse 25 with “therefore”. 

Paul then says “having put away falsehood” which is another way of saying “having put away anything that is not Christ”. Here, “falsehood” means more than lying words; it refers to all the ways the old self used to walk, alienated from God because of ignorance (Eph. 4:18). Thus, putting away falsehood simply means being in Christ, who is truth (Eph. 4:21).

In light of this, verse 25 instructs Christians to instead “speak the truth with his neighbor, for we are members one of another”. We ought not only to speak words that are true, but we ought to speak in Christ, for what we do or say has an effect on the entire body of believers. Even a seemingly inconsequential conversation with another person can be a profound blessing or curse for the entire body. 

Paul then follows in verse 26 by saying “be angry but do not sin”. It is important to note here that anger and sin are not mutually exclusive! It is possible to have a loving, righteous, self-controlled, God-honoring anger that is led by the Spirit. But most of the time when we are angry, it is likely rooted in our prideful and sinful nature. We are like the older brother, who is self-righteously angry at his prodigal sibling (Luke 15:28), or like Jonah, who is angry over the death of a plant and indifferent about the souls of thousands in Nineveh (Jnh. 4:9). Anger is only righteous when it is over God’s name being profaned and God’s holiness being perverted. It should have nothing to do with us. That being said, though anger may be justified, we ought to still be slow to anger (Jam. 1:19), as God is likewise slow to anger (Exo. 34:6), and practice mercy over judgement (Jam. 2:13). However, being slow to anger does not mean ignoring anger altogether; Paul says “do not let the sun go down on your anger” because if we simply brush things aside and harbor our anger, it could lead to bitterness, vengeance, or even malice. God governs the world in perfect Justice even when we sleep, and we must trust in Him rather than constantly clenching on to our anger. 

In light of this, Paul warns in verse 27 to “give no opportunity to the devil”. There is a devil who knows how to attack our weak points and prowls around like a lion seeking something to devour (1 Pet. 5:8). Therefore, we must not compromise any part of our life; it would be foolish to think, I’ll just work on one spiritual area at a time. 

In verses 28-29, Paul gives two examples of what it means to put off the old self and put on the new self. These examples were particularly relevant for those living in Ephesus at the time, and we must likewise follow these examples accordingly in the context of our own lives and culture. We see in verse 28 that the thief should not only stop stealing, but also do honest work “so that he may have something to share with anyone in need”. Likewise, not only should we stop all corrupting talk, for we will be judged by every careless word we speak (Matt. 12:36), but our words should be “only such as is good for building up, as fits the occasion (something good in one circumstance does not imply that it is good in another), that it may give grace to those who hear”. These are cases that model a complete transformation. We should not only put off our old self, but must also put on our new self! It is this total transformation, where our corruption is turned into a blessing for others, that powerfully testifies how God, rich in mercy, brought us from dead to life (Eph. 2:4-5)! 

Consider

1. Are you giving opportunities to the devil? Meditate on what your spiritual weaknesses are and fight viciously against sin!
2. We often think it's enough to just put off our old self. What are ways in which you can put on your new self and be a blessing to others?
3. Meditate on Matthew 12:36 -  “I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give account for every careless word they speak.” Let us fearfully guard our tongues!