Ephesians 4:17-19: The Human Heart
April 16, 2020

17 Now this I say and testify in the Lord, that you must no longer walk as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds. 18 They are darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them, due to their hardness of heart. 19 They have become callous and have given themselves up to sensuality, greedy to practice every kind of impurity.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


As Christians, we are called to live in the world whilst not living like the world. It is a slippery slope for those that profess Christ but want to continue to chase after their own desires. Paul makes it clear in these verses that we are all called to live holy and separate lives from the rest of the world and from our past selves. 

In verse 17, Paul begins to break down the natural condition of mankind: we are “futile” in our minds. This does not mean that those apart from Christ are not capable of significant intellectual achievement or intriguing philosophical thought. In fact, we see many of what we might describe as the brightest minds coming from non-believers. But what this verse is saying is that all of this is foolish and worthless without God. As Proverbs 9:10 says, “the fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom.” There is no wisdom or goodness that can come from the heart of man that is apart from God. 

Paul continues to shine a light on the natural state of our hearts in verse 18. We were all once “darkened in our understanding” because of our hardened hearts. If we continue to chase after the things of this world and ignore the life that God has called us to, our hearts only grow colder to the God from whom all understanding and goodness flows. 

Why were our hearts hardened? Verse 19 states that it is because we were given up into our own desires. But let us not deceive ourselves, and think that our hearts are now immune to being hardened. This is a lie. Whenever we desire something more than God, our hearts are hardened and it becomes much easier to commit sin, the sin that is described as “sensuality” and “every kind of impurity.” It is easy to read these words and be tempted to place ourselves on a pedestal by thinking that we are good enough people to never commit such sins. But as we saw above, there is no goodness without God, and there is no limit to how evil the human heart can become. 

Therefore, we must be wary of our own desires and longings. It is a common pitfall for Christians to simply “follow their heart” rather than the Word of God and the discipline of the church. Brothers and sisters, we must tear down our pride that says we are good people, and realize that our hearts are evil. Only then will we cling so closely to the Word of God and confess our daily need for guidance from the only One who is good.  


Consider

1. Is your life different after you met God, or do you live the same way? 
2. Are you influencing those around you through holiness, or are those around you influencing you through worldliness? 
3. Let us confess our need for guidance to God this morning. 