Ephesians 4:20-24: The Way of Learning Christ
April 17, 2020

20 But that is not the way you learned Christ!— 21 assuming that you have heard about him and were taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus, 22 to put off your old self, which belongs to your former manner of life and is corrupt through deceitful desires, 23 and to be renewed in the spirit of your minds, 24 and to put on the new self, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Paul begins by sternly emphasizing that the way of Christ has nothing to do with the way of Gentiles (as described in yesterday’s devotional). Christian, do not continue walking in sin because God has removed the hardness of your heart (Eph. 4:18). Do not strive to fill yourself with intellectual achievements as they are nothing but futility (Eph. 4:17) without the fear of the Lord (Proverbs 9:10). Paul states sharply in verse 20 that this “is not the way you learned Christ!” 

How is it then that Christ is learned? Paul explains in verse 21 that instead, this is a process of firstly hearing about Christ and secondly being taught in him. Here, “him” refers to Jesus, and we see at the end of this verse that “the truth is in Jesus”. In other words, Paul is saying a Christian must be taught “in truth” which is Christ himself. This is why Paul says that in order to grow as a body, we are to speak the truth in love (Eph. 4:15). Without this truth, our love has no basis, causing us to be tossed to and fro by every wind of doctrine (Eph. 4:14); truth is found in Christ and in nothing apart from Christ. While this may seem obvious, recognize that many congregations are not being taught in him, or worse, not even hearing about him! This is why Paul is careful to begin the sentence with the word “assuming” - let us always be vigilant to fight against false teachings!

And what is learned in Christ? Paul explains in the next few verses that we are taught in him to put off your old self and put on the new self. These verses explain how we are to walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which we have been called in response to God’s gift of grace (Eph. 4:1). By the grace of God, we are given a new heart of desires and practices that we must put on to replace our old desires and practices. Notice how in verse 22, “put off” is still a command; we should not wait idly for our old desires and practices to disappear. We are to follow the example of the first Christians in Ephesus, where “a number of those who had practiced magic arts brought their books together and burned them” (Acts 19:19) - we must burn away the ways of our old self. But make no mistake, we can do these works only because we are a new creation in Christ (2 Cor 5:17). Recall that we were “created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them” (Eph. 2:10). 

As we are enlightened by the Spirit, we realize in verse 21 that our “former manner of life is corrupt through deceitful desires”. Here, the Greek word for “corrupt” is associated with the process of rotting and wasting away. In our blindness, we enjoyed these desires and practices without realizing that they were like poisons that would defile us. But now, we put off the old self willingly, recognizing that these desires were “deceitful”. 

Moreover, verse 24 states that we must “put on the new self”. The good news here is that we do not need to make this “new self” but rather we are simply told to put it on! It has already been “created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness!” While our old self inherited a sinful nature of futility and ignorance in Adam, our new self is created in Christ, from whom we inherit this righteousness and holiness. 

How are we to put off our old self and put on our new self? Verse 23, which is sandwiched between the aforementioned phrases, clearly instructs the Christian to be “renewed in the spirit of your minds”. Simply put, set your mind on things that are above, not on things of this Earth (Col. 3:2). It is by the renewal of your mind that you are transformed to no longer be conformed to this world (Romans 12:2). Christian, take off your prison clothes, which robs your joy and corrupts your soul, for the victory is already won! Delight in your new self - freely given to you and purchased by Christ!
  

Consider

1. Meditate on your attitudes, desires, and actions - see if there is any part of your old self that you still have not put off. Do you recognize how corrupt and deceitful they are? Do you recognize that in Christ you have the ability to overcome?
2. Do you set your mind on God in everything that you do? On top of daily prayer time, consider praying to God throughout the day as well! 
3. In what ways have you recently been transformed to be more like Christ?