Ephesians 5:22-24: Submission to the Head
April 24, 2020

22 Wives, submit to your own husbands, as to the Lord. 23 For the husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is the head of the church, his body, and is himself its Savior. 24 Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit in everything to their husbands.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Brothers and sisters, one incredible privilege the Spirit gives us is the desire to elevate the Lord and others through our submission. What a beautiful thing it is that we, who were once dead in our self-assertive, self-seeking desires (Eph 2:3), were made alive in Christ, becoming a person who joyfully blesses others in submission!

Understanding the idea of submission is so important that after Paul tells us Christians to submit to one another, he spends another 21 verses discussing it within specific contexts. But before looking at any example of submission, let us remember why submission is a good gift that God calls us to embrace. 

All Christians are called by God to practice submission (Eph 5:21) and so it must be for our good (Deut 6:24). But why? First, we remember that it is because of our complete submission to God that we found a lasting joy and life in Christ. Through submission, we may reign with Him. Secondly, it must be good because it is part of who God is. The Father and Son are equal, yet the Son is eternally in submission to his Father (1 Cor. 15:28) in a way that is perfectly loving and harmonious. Thirdly, we were made to bear the image of God. God designed us in love and gave us such a high privilege of mimicking His character. But if God is three Persons, how can we truly bear his trinitarian image without thinking about how we must act with one another? We cannot fully glorify God without enjoying the unique love of submission that is found within His character. Finally, submission teaches us how to prosper in the Kingdom of God, where the greatest is like the youngest and the leader as one who serves (Luke 22:26-27). 

Yet it is often difficult in our flesh to find such joy in submission. But praise God that the Holy Spirit is our helper! Let us wholeheartedly seek to be filled with the Holy Spirit so that we may be able to glorify God through submitting to one another. 

Now, in verses 22-24, Paul addresses a unique and glorious example of submission exhibited by the wife in marriage. Paul later says in verse 29 that the “mystery” of marriage is explained by Christ and the Church. Marriage is no accident nor is it an arbitrary social institution. It was designed to reflect something about God’s character and God’s heart and the Gospel that cannot be reflected in any other way. God planned out marriage from the beginning of time to reflect the Gospel. Adam’s headship and Eve’s submission existed before the fall. We see here that even before Christ came to rescue his Church, in Genesis, God was already using marriage to describe his covenantal love for the us. It truly points to how God chose us in him before the foundation of the world and predestined us for adoption (Eph. 1:4-5)! The marriage of husband and wife has always been a witness to the Gospel. 

Brothers and sisters, let us remember that marriage is a platform to display the Gospel of Christ and the Church. Because Christ so lovingly died for the Church, the Church so willingly submits to His lordship. Would we not confuse or obscure the meaning of this in our marriages but rather embrace our complementary roles! 

Women of God, you are equal with men in your value, competence, mutual interdependence, sinful nature, and salvation by grace. You are chosen and treasured by God; in being the wife, you are given a role of tremendous influence - embrace such a role with joy! There is a way you shine the glory of Christ that men cannot do as there is a way men shine the glory of Christ that you cannot do. Let each gender use its unique glory for mutual blessing, working together perfectly to display the Gospel for God’s glory. 

Paul says in verse 24, “now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit in everything to their husbands”. What does this look like? Biblical submission in marriage requires women to first be in submission to the Lord. When Paul states “as to the Lord” in verse 22, he emphasizes that submission to the husband is part of desiring to please Christ by obeying Christ’s will. Next, biblical submission is recognizing the husband’s headship. Paul writes “the husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is the head of the church, his body, and he himself is Savior”. The wife must affirm it even if the husband himself refuses his headship, for his role is not by choice but rather by design. Since the husband is the head, he initiates; the wife does not act before the husband or independently of him. Instead, she must be totally loyal to her husband, encouraging, helping, and supporting him with her many gifts in grace and strength. Brothers and sisters, recognize that under a biblical headship, the wife will thrive! 

Although Paul calls wives to submit “in everything”, it is crucial to acknowledge that she must not follow the husband into anything against the will of Christ. The wife should not submit if the husband expects the wife to sin, is mentally incapacitated, is abusive and endangers the family, or commits adultery. Nor does “in everything” mean saying “yes” to every demand, for doing so would foster the husband’s laziness and irresponsibility. Rather, “in everything” means full submission in thoughts, words, and deeds, actively seeking to influence the husband so that he may grow to better mimic Christ as the head. 

In a biblical marriage, the wife does not live in fear, nor is passive, nor stifles her spiritual gifts. Instead, by the help of the Spirit, she follows the will of Christ in spiritual strength, wholeheartedly yielding to her husband to demonstrate the Gospel. 

If we are to demonstrate an Earthly picture of the Gospel through our marriages, let us not commit heresy! Many marriages follow traditionalism which leads to an unbiblical abuse culture. Christ never put down his bride! On the other hand, many marriages follow a heretical individualism that considers gender differences inconsequential. But the Church finds joy only through surrendering the self in full submission to Christ! The latter view is particularly strong at Princeton. However, let us not argue over which misrepresentation of marriage is worse or deserves greater attention. Let us instead fix our eyes on the Gospel and in unity, speak the truth in love (Eph. 4:15), firmly opposing anything that is contrary to the Word (Eph. 4:25).  

Brothers and sisters, let us consider Christ, who perfectly submitted to the Father’s will, and seek after such a submission with one another so that we can better know Him, love Him, and glorify Him.

Consider

1. What is your attitude towards submission? Is it filled with resentment or filled with great joy? In what ways have you submitted to others, especially during this unique time?
2. In light of this passage, ask yourself what characteristics are most important in a spouse. Do they match the criteria that you currently prioritize? 
3. Reflect and pray about the meaning of marriage and the necessity to affirm and protect it. 