Ephesians 6:10-12: Against the Devil
April 28, 2020

10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. 11 Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. 12 For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places. 

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Here begins one of the most popular verses of Paul’s epistles. You may have colored in the armor color-by-number sketched in Sunday school or may have read about it when you were younger and thought about a knight in shining armor battling the enemies.

A recurring theme that Paul presents in his letters is an imagery of the Kingdom of God against the forces of evil who are attacking the saints. Paul, I believe, being trained and raised up in the Jewish faith, knew very well the physical realities of violence that translated in full to the realities of the not seen — the spiritual realm. The battle between flesh and spirit, the battle between evil and good are illustrated in both Paul’s language that are the painting brushstrokes of a battleground that Christ has already conquered (we see throughout the Old Testament battles fought where God defeats the enemy and Israelites merely rout them) and also in the metaphors that he employs to better accustom the mind of the readers to the not seen by using examples of the seen.

In today’s passage, we see the image of the “armor of God” (verse 11). We will see in detail what each of these parts of the armor do and how they are inspired by the Roman armor tomorrow, but for today, we can see why we must put on such an armor.

We are soldiers for Christ (2 Timothy 2:3-4). We are the legionaries who stand arm in arm with shields interlocked and our gladii strapped to our legs. We, the Church, like a legion works in one effort, mind, and goal. We, the Body, eat together, rest together, and fight together.

Paul, looking at the Roman soldiers who are dominating all the region around the Mediterranean Sea, knows what discipline, control, and single-minded will the legions of the Roman military have in their strength to defeat the enemies of the Roman empire. And hence, he wants to show that to “be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might” (verse 10), we must “Put on the whole armor of God” (verse 11). The Roman soldiers and their state-issued armor announced with pride the might and glory of Rome. When the Roman legion marched into conquered regions in perfect unison, the conquered people did not merely see a rag-tag group of scarcely clad armor, but they marveled at an army adorned and dressed with the finest armor carrying the insignia of their republic — “SPQR”. If their armor had dents and scratches, they merely testified of both the tenacity of the soldiers and the head of the empire.

How much greater is the Kingdom of God? We are to be strong “in the Lord and in the strength of his might” (verse 10). The Roman Empire was mighty, and strong, yes, but they did not compare to the might of our Lord Jesus Christ. We see a picture of this in Revelations 19:13-16 and from here we see the King and Conqueror who leads the final battle. We can be stronger than any nation on earth because His empire is not the pond of the Mediterranean Sea, but the vastness of the universe — and that’s an understatement.

So, if we are to be strong in our God, how are we to do so? Firstly, as we see in verse 11, we put on the armor of God. Why? Because we are part of His Kingdom — a soldier without the coat of arms, without the insignia, without the stamp of their lord is a soldier to be slain in battle. Furthermore, it is so that we “may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil” (verse 11). For we do not have a Lord who will send us stripped and vulnerable into the thicket of battle — once we have been stripped of the enemy’s garments of evil and sin, upon us are put on His armor (of which we will go into detail tomorrow). Furthermore, this armor that is put on us is fit for the battle that is at hand for us. As the Romans were to put on armor that was fit for the battle of the climate, God gives us armor that is fit for the climate of our battles. Our battle “to stand against the schemes of the devil” (verse 11).

“For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.” (verse 12). Perhaps I need not say any further to describe what we are fighting against as Paul does a sufficient job! Rather, here I will summarise and clarify (in all honesty, that is all I do!)

Here, Paul is not enumerating a list of different beings we are at war against. As we can see, Paul is further clarifying his prior point with each proceding phrase. Let us follow his argument. “For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood” — so what do we fight against? We fight “against the authorities” — wait, who has authority? They are “the cosmic powers over this present darkness” — cosmic powers? Like stars and planets? No, no, they are “the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places” — oh I see, “the devil” from verse 11.

I hope you enjoyed my little internal dialogue.

Brothers and sisters, we are soldiers. Not just lone soldiers without a lord or a master, but soldiers of the greatest army in existence, nay, imaginable. Let us truly put on that armor and be joyful to know that the War is won. Let us put on the armor that identifies us as Christ’s and gives us the defense in accordance to that identity.


Consider

1. Do you act like a soldier, or as if an Israelite in the desert in Numbers 14?
2. What change can you make to truly practice your soldiership in Christ?
3. Look through other parts of Paul’s letters, what other army imagery do you see?
