Ephesians 5:3-6: No Longer Sons of Disobedience
April 21, 2020

3 But sexual immorality and all impurity or covetousness must not even be named among you, as is proper among saints. 4 Let there be no filthiness nor foolish talk nor crude joking, which are out of place, but instead let there be thanksgiving. 5 For you may be sure of this, that everyone who is sexually immoral or impure, or who is covetous (that is, an idolater), has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. 6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



What is the opposite of being an imitator of God who loves God and loves like God (Ephesians 5:1-2)?

They are the “sexually immoral or impure, or who is covetous (that is, an idolater)” — why? Because they have “no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God” (verse 5). Those who do not walk in the love of God to be imitators of God are those who practice “sexual immorality and all impurity or covetousness” (verse 3). Those who do not know God and are not in Christ as the believers are in Christ are naturally sexually immoral in all their thoughts and actions, are impure in their motives and works, and are covetous and idolatrous in all things that they desire.

Let us start with sexual immorality. What is sexual immorality? This world has made sex, sexual imagery, and sexual language commonplace in all that we do in modern society. The most popular of swear words is a slang term for “to have sexual intercourse,” the most popular of movies and shows contain one or more forms of sexual imagery,  and the most popular and desirable thing that society has placed in any relationship seems to be sex.

Why is this something that belongs to the “sons of disobedience” (verse 6) and not to the “saints” (verse 3)? It is simply because at the root of it all is the humanist expansion of the worship of man. Sexual immorality is the practice of sex, in all its many spectacles, in a way that is not pleasing to the eyes of God and is mar against the image of God. Sex was supposed to be beautiful — representing the union of two into one, yet it has become a human-elevating form of mere hedonistic pleasure. When there is a sexually immoral action performed, including even just watching pornography or thinking lustful thoughts (and this includes even thinking dreamily about some half-naked figure in a popular movie), we are essentially poiting our eyes away from God and worshipping what God has created, rather than the Creator.

Sex is mentioned by Paul because is the most potent form of understanding unity. By practicing it immorally, there is a fundamentally destructive art of disunity that forms that merely puts on the sheep’s skin of unity. It is detestable to God because unity can only be achieved in God, yet people now seek it in self-worship of hedonistic pleasure.

The Christian must not practice sex in such a way, but as an act of worship that truly represents unity that we talked so much about in the past chapter. Sexual activities are meant to be between a man and a woman within the confines of marriage as the marriage shows Christ’s devotion to us, and the sex itself shows the oneness of two in one.

Next is “impurity” — uncleanness. What does this even mean? When something is impure, it is defiled by something. It is filled with filth that does not allow it to achieve the original purpose for which it was made. The Israelites are given many ritualistic cleansing laws and sacrificial systems to themselves of this impurity both physically and morally. A bowl that was made for eating cannot be used if it is filled with excrement that prevents proper usage of the bowl — the bowl must be completely washed out. An impurity within an individual is anything both sin and weight (Hebrews 12:1) that does not allow that individual to accomplish the purpose for which they were made — to worship God.

If a person’s mind is filled with the desires of the flesh, and are unclean with the practices of satisfying the flesh, it is impossible to please God. It is impossible to desire the right things, to do the right things, and therefore will only continue in the evil of the impurities present.

A Christian ought not to do so. The Christian must cast aside all the desires of the world that cling so heavily so as to make every action we commit, and thought that we think to be committed to our vessel-purpose of serving the Lord. No longer do we worship ourselves and our desires of the flesh to bring about the unclean fleeting satisfaction of the flesh, but we purify ourselves daily with the blood of Christ, worshipping the one who has provided such purity for us through His own purity.

Finally, we have covetousness. Covetousness is the desire and envy to be ahead, to be better. It is looking to the side and behind us to see how far we come according to the standards of this world. It results in looking to the fellow humans around us and saying, “I just need to arrive at that point to be happy” or saying, “I am at least better than that guy” — it is again, the worship of humanity and the human standards of success.

Yet, this is not the way of the Christian, for we have only one way to look — towards Christ! He is the one who went before us and endured all for us (Hebrews 12:2). We compare not to others as they are merely human but we compare to the Christ who is God! Within our hearts He lives and He sets us up before Himself (who is the standard) and shows us to be up to the standard because He has met the standard! Any form of looking to the left or to the right is a man-worship that says, “I have yet to meet a standard that I desire for myself!” — what foolishness!

All three of these Paul sums up quite simply as idolatry. In verse 5, Paul says “that is, an idolater” and this points to the three types of people that come before in the same verse. These three people are not three separate people — they are one! It is any sinner not in Christ, a “son of disobedience,” that is an “idolater” who can be sexually immoral, impure, or/and covetous. Paul is making a singular comparison between the “saint” and the “son of disobedience” — all those who are not in Christ are idolaters of themselves.

And so, the Christian is to lift up thanksgiving for we have been given a new life, rescued from these sins (verse 4). We do not return and act as if we are still our old selves by speaking false, unrighteous talks as listed in verse 4, but we look to God in thanksgiving and act out our gratitude by being workers for Christ.

Brothers and sisters, let us truly not be deceived by this world. For their words are “empty words” that hold no power over those of us in Christ (verse 6). We are the inheritors of “the kingdom of Christ and God”, and we have all our identity in being a citizen of it! We can fight the idolatry of the self for we have been delivered from “the wrath of God” (verse 6). Let us remember and sin no more!

Consider

1. How have we committed idolatry so freely recently?
2. Have you bought into the world’s definition of sex, purity, and success?