Ephesians 5:15-21: Walking in Wisdom, Filled with the Spirit
April 23, 2020

15 Look carefully then how you walk, not as unwise but as wise, 16 making the best use of the time, because the days are evil. 17 Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is. 18 And do not get drunk with wine, for that is debauchery, but be filled with the Spirit, 19 addressing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord with your heart, 20 giving thanks always and for everything to God the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 21 submitting to one another out of reverence for Christ.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***




As we saw in yesterday’s devotional, we are called to “walk as children of light” (verse 8). But how exactly do we walk in this manner? Paul gives two answers in today’s passage:

1) Walking in Wisdom: Paul is very clear in verses 15-17 that we must walk in wisdom by “making the best use of the time” and “understanding what the will of the Lord is.” This is much more than a call to productivity in our schoolwork and the other tasks that we have for the day.  This is a call to be productive in the eyes of the Lord; that is, to do His will and to advance His kingdom!

We must realize that each second we continue to enjoy on this earth is a gift from the Father. However, this gift is not “free,” as we cannot do whatever we want with it. Instead, we will all give an account to God for how we spend this time (Romans 14:12). At that moment, the only matter of importance will be whether we did the “will of the Lord” or not. Brothers and sisters, let us live today for His kingdom and for His will, not for our own wills and our own agendas. 

It is interesting to note that the default is to be unwise and we are now called to live as wise instead. Similarly, the days are defaultly evil, and we are now called to use them for good (verse 16). When we simply go through the day without even a thought to offer it to the Lord, we are stuck in the “default setting” of living as unwise. This morning, let us commit this day to the Lord and “live not as unwise, but wise.” 

2) Being Filled with the Spirit: We are called to “not get drunk with wine,” but be “filled with the Spirit” (verse 18). As you might expect, this principle is not just exclusive to wine. We musn’t seek fulfillment in anything this world has to offer, from successful careers and loving families to League of Legends rankings. Rather, we must be “filled with the Spirit.” 

But what does being filled with the Spirit mean? Here, Paul is talking about being filled with the joy and the hope that comes from the promises of God and from God Himself. This joy overflows into “addressing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs” and “singing and making melody to the Lord” (verse 19). No matter the happiness (and disappointment) we have found in alcohol, relationships, or success, the fulfillment that comes from the Spirit is much greater than all of these things. 

Furthermore, being filled with the Spirit is not a personal matter that is kept to oneself. We see in verse 19 that it leads to “addressing one another in psalms and hymns” and in verse 21 that it leads to “submitting to one another out of reverence for Christ.” The fullness of the Spirit is so great that it overflows into the lives of others and empowers us to serve them.

This morning, let us long to be filled with the Spirit. Let David’s confession be our own, that “as a deer pants for flowing streams, so pants my soul for you, O God” (Psalm 42:1). Then, we can walk as children of light.

Consider

1. Do you offer your days to Lord? 
2. In what do we seek our greatest fulfillment and satisfaction? 