Ephesians 6:1-4: Obey Your Parents
April 26, 2020

1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. 2 “Honor your father and mother” (this is the first commandment with a promise), 3 “that it may go well with you and that you may live long in the land.” 4 Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

We have seen the relationship of the husband to the wife in the last couple verses. Paul made it very clear that the relationship of the wife to the husband should be that of the Church to Christ. This showed that every relationship that we see on earth are not mere standalone connections that exist for its own sake, but are God-inspired institutions for the purposes of showing more of God.

Similarly, the relationship between the parent and the child extends to more than the individuals apparently involved and points to the divine relationship of God to Himself and God to us, His creation bearing the image of God.

Perhaps as students in college who return home each summer (and now a bit earlier and for longer due to the predicaments), this concept of honoring our parents is something we started to think about more extensively. What does this commandment (verse 2; Exodus 20:12) look like for those who no longer really live at home with their parents and are transitioning for their care into the “real world”? As we become adults, how are we to continue to “honor” our parents?

These questions concerning the commandment of Exodus 20:12 (aka the fifth of the Ten Commandments), reiterated in the second verse of our passage, is quite simply answered by Paul in the first verse of our passage.  You see, the second verse, “honor your father and mother,” was given by Paul to explain the reason why we must do the first verse of obeying our parents. In such a way, Paul reduces the command of honoring our father and mother into the equally singular command of “obey your parents in the Lord” (verse 1).

The word for “obey” here means “to be under the authority of” and also means “to hear attentively to” — it does not mean a mere begrudging carrying out of tasks because we are forced to do so, but rather it requires an agreement to and a willing heart to follow your parents. It means to desire and love to do what they desire.

How can we do this? I don’t think there is one individual who can honestly testify that they have not held a moment in their lives detesting their parents, have not thought ill against their parents, or have not disagreed or disobeyed their parents. Yet, we know God to be someone who desires perfection (Matthew 5:48). And so naturally, we do not look to another human being who is as fallen as any of us, but we look to the Son of God for the proper course of action. We look to Jesus.

Jesus was the perfect practitioner of the fifth commandment. On earth, He did all that the Father desired (John 5:19) and does it all under the authority of the Father (John 8:28). He did this to the point of death (Matthew 28:39). Not only that, but He still awaits in heaven, standing for us until that last day when we will come to Him as His Bride (Matthew 24:36).

What we should take away from the work of Jesus in His perfect example of submission to the Father is not that if we work hard enough, we can achieve a perfect obedience to our parents — such would be an act of legalism. Rather, it means that, by looking to Jesus, we understand what it means to obey our parents “in the Lord” (verse 1, emphasis added). You see, just as Paul explained to the husband to look to the wife as Christ looked to the Church, we are to look to our parents as Christ looks to the Father. We are to understand that if Christ’s perfect obedience is to be reflected in our work of loving our parents and obeying them best we could, we do it in our greater desire to follow Christ and to shine Christ in all manners of our lives.

In the Lord, we obey our parents knowing that it is an act of worship that shouts to the world of the obedience of Christ unto the cross. And we all know what kind of obedience was shown to the world on that cross, on that Calvary hill.

This is reflected in the third verse of our passage: “that it may go well with you and that you may live long in the land”. This was the blessing given with the commandment (as our verse 2 shows) and it communicates the fullness of obedience required to stay in our Father’s goodness. As we obey our parents, we come to see how we must obey the Father, and therefore become deserving of blessings He offers to those who are perfect. As we, the Church, have been deemed perfect by our Father, we are recipients of that blessing, and as we observe our obedience to our fathers and mothers, we realize our blessings.

And if Christ’s perfect obedience to the Father was to be reflected by the child’s obedience to his parents, then the Father’s perfect goodness and instruction to Christ should be reflected in the parents’ loving care and instruction to their children as verse 4 shows. Parents, if they are to expect obedience from their children, are to bring up the children “in the discipline and instruction of the Lord” (verse 4).

Yet, we know that parents don’t quite get it right, as we also do not obey our parents when we ought to. Does this mean that we should ignore our parents and disobey them? No! Obey them to your greatest ability as long as your obeying them shows and reflects Christ’s Gethsemane cry (Matthew 26:39). This means that as long as they are requiring of you something that does not go against the Word of God, follow them even if it is something you’d rather not do. This is hard — and yet we know following Christ is harder.

This is a command to “children” — meaning in the original language, “descendent, child” — has no regard to age necessarily. As long as we are our parent’s children, we are to listen and honor them. Solomon did so with David, Isaac with Abraham, and Sham and Japheth with Noah — not to mention the eternal Son to the Father. This means, we, college students, must do the same.

Obedience to our parents is not some “cherry on top” that is desirable if we want to receive blessings. For the Christian, it is actually a practice of worship that glorifies God and reveals more of our already-received blessing in Christ — to not be set apart by our obedience would be sinful.

Brothers and sisters, let us reflect Christ in every corner of our lives — especially in the harder tasks such as obeying our parents to honor them.

Consider

1. Do you obey your parents? How can you obey them better? Do you need to apologize to them for your misconduct in the past couple of weeks?
2. Does your actions in obedience to your parents show Christ’s obedience to the Father?
3. When is the last time you asked your parents what they wanted? How have you served your parents?
