Malachi 2:6-7: True Instructions From Clean Lips
May 10, 2020

6 True instruction was in his mouth, and no wrong was found on his lips. He walked with me in peace and uprightness, and he turned many from iniquity. 7 For the lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and people should seek instruction from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


The “he” that the Lord talks about here is Levi, but more specifically, He is not just talking about the one son of Jacob but his entire generation that descended. To be even more exact, God is referring to those who were of the tribe of Levi who were the true descendent of Levi — those who were true priests. Just as the true Israel are not merely those born in flesh to the generations, but those who are the spiritual descendents of Israel (Romans 9:8), the true Levites are those who follow the promises given to the children of Levi (Deuteronomy 10:8; 33:10).

These true Levite priests take on very important identities.

They are those who have “True instruction” in their mouths, and “no wrong was found” on their lips (verse 6). Quite literally this means that those priests who are the proper ministers to the Lord are those who are to preach truth and do so in correctness. “What is truth?”, this generation may echo in the words of Pilate before Jesus (John 18:38) — but the answer stands before them in all of nature and even within their hearts (Romans 2:15) and most clearly in the person of Jesus (John 14:6). The Levites were to preach the Law, the Word of God, that clearly spoke of Jesus well before His incarnation. To verbalize the Word of God was to hear the voice of God, and to read the Word of God was to see the face of God, and to speak the Law is to taste for ourselves this revelation of truth. They must instruct this truth, but also do it with no wrong (verse 6) — all interpretation and excavation of the Torah and the Prophets must be studied with utmost adherence to the character of God.

They are those who walk “in peace and uprightness” setting an example of a single-minded dedication to the will of God (verse 6). The priest who is to represent the whole of Israel and orate the desires of God (verse 7) must also be righteous as God is righteous (Isaiah 5:16). Imagine a priest in his ephod who goes on to drink heavily and fornicate in disgrace as the worst of the city, the people who are in need of him at the altar would tremble at the idea that this man would be the one to appease their sins before a holy God — and they certainly would not trust this man to be the one to “guard knowledge” (verse 7). 

They are people-reformers. They turn the sinners from iniquity so that they may be holy as God is holy (verse 6; Leviticus 19:2).

They are guardians (verse 7). Guardians against whom? Against themselves — from men — they hold the Word in high regard and study it and preach it so that the interpretation of it may not become tainted with the evil doctrines formulated in the heart of man. They “guard knowledge” because through knowledge — true knowledge — one can come to know God in their minds and love Him in their hearts.

They are messengers (verse 7). A good messenger does not speak for himself but only for he who is delivering a message from. The messenger merely takes from the mouth of his master and delivers it to the recipient who must hear it. He inputs not his own ideas and recipes for success or “good news” but merely speaks what is written.

Do we look like a true priest? Are we speaking truth in correctness? Are we people-reformers? Are we guardians? Are we messengers? Are we the peace-making righteous?

We have been called to be of the “royal priesthood” (1 Peter 2:9), and therefore, our answer should be a firm yes. You see, we have a Christ who is our High Priest (Hebrews 4:14) who is of the royal priestly line of Melchizedek (Hebrews 5:6). By Him, we have also become sons of God and therefore have earned the same royal line of priesthood. We have a Father who is of the greatest royalty, and a Brother of the greatest priesthood. We can be true priests because though we fall short of our many identities to fulfill in being a faithful priest, Christ fulfilled all the identities of a priest perfectly.

It is as though our passage today talks of Christ. True instruction was in His mouth, and no wrong was found on His lips. He walked with God in peace and uprightness, and He turned may from iniquity. For the lips of the Priest guards knowledge, and people seek instruction from His mouth, for He is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

If this is the Christ we are to imitate, we ought to imitate Him with a fiery zeal.

We should learn the truth and learn it correctly with the intent of instructing others truthfully and correctly. We should ponder upon the Truth, Jesus Christ, day and night as the Psalmist meditates on the Law day and night (Psalm 1:2). Through the reading of the Word of God, we see the face of Christ, and in His radiance, reflected in us, we share to the world as lights of the world.

We should make peace and be the most righteous in the world despite what the world deems as right and wrong. Though people laugh at us for being “old fashioned” or “archaic” or perhaps even “barbaric”, we bring peace to the world by our appeasing of the Almighty for there will be no peace in us if there is no peace with God through righteousness. We must show to the world our righteousness that was bought by our Savior’s righteousness.

We should turn people to Christ so that they may be able to turn from their sinful ways. We should evangelize to the unbelievers so they may see Christ, and we should plead with the brothers and sisters that they may turn from any evils they are committing against the Lord.

We should be guarding the Word of God with zeal so that the postmodernist fancies of this age will not contaminate the Church as much as it already has. The Church must weep and ask the Lord to help us to turn back from the falsehood we have learned so that we can once again be true guardians who will rather die first than fall victim to the sentiments of Satan that topple this generation.

We should be messengers who share the evangelium — those who run into cities shouting “Good News! Good News! The Emperor — the King of Kings has conquered death and the world!” not sugar coating it with worldly emotionalism, antinomianism, or legalism, but filling it with the very Word of God that has been gifted us freely in the 66 books of the Bible.

Could we be real priests? Could we model after our Lord?

Consider

1. Have you been living like priests in the past couple of weeks?
2. Which of the 5 roles of the priests we talked about do you struggle most with? Which do you perform best at?