Malachi 1:6-9: An Evil Worship
May 4, 2020

6 “A son honors his father, and a servant his master. If then I am a father, where is my honor? And if I am a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of hosts to you, O priests, who despise my name. But you say, ‘How have we despised your name?’ 7 By offering polluted food upon my altar. But you say, ‘How have we polluted you?’ By saying that the Lord's table may be despised. 8 When you offer blind animals in sacrifice, is that not evil? And when you offer those that are lame or sick, is that not evil? Present that to your governor; will he accept you or show you favor? says the Lord of hosts. 9 And now entreat the favor of God, that he may be gracious to us. With such a gift from your hand, will he show favor to any of you? says the Lord of hosts.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In Ephesians 6, in our devotionals, we talked about the relationships of the parent to the child and also the relationship of the master to the servant. We learned that these relationships are evident and representative of the relationships that we have with our God, Yahweh. These two same relationships are shown once again in today’s passage as the Israelites fail to properly honor the Father, and as they fail to properly fear the Lord (verse 6).

These Israelites know best how to worship the Lord properly in fear and in honor of Him. They have been raised since birth, even since the eighth day (for males) to remember the Lord in virtually all things in their lives. The Torah, the Pentateuch, reveals in great detail the lives of the Israelites from day to day, and how every element of their lives were to be an image of worship to the Lord. Despite this, we see the fallen nature of man take over like an uncontrolled undergrowth in a neglected garden. The Israelites repeat the action of tipping a bucket onto the garden without water, and pull up weed without cutting off the root of the weed. They repeat actions, but do not know who they are intending to worship.

Worst yet, these are the priests, those who are to be the teachers of the Law (Deuteronomy 33:10), who have forgotten and neglected proper worship unto the Lord. They despise the name of the Lord, not because they have merely said so, but because they do so in all the ways in which they worship the Lord (verse 7).

The primary way in which they do this is through their offering of polluted food (verse 7). Our God, in no way, shape or form, needs our hand in provision of His sustenance. He is the only one who has aseity — He is self-sustaining. However, He desires sacrifice as it is the statement and snapshot of our hearts at the moment of coming into the presence of God. Whenever an Israelite entered into the presence of God in the tabernacle or the temple, he brought a sacrifice, not to physically appease the Lord, but to show the condition of His heart and to represent the payment he was due to the Creator. God desired sacrifice because in obeying the sacrificial worship, the Israelite was showing His heart for the Lord.

Yet, we see a polluted sacrifice unto the Lord that is strictly prohibited by God (Leviticus 4). Blind, lame and sick animals are offered to the Lord that one would not even offer unto their governor (verse 8)! The sacrifices to God, if it is to be a reflection of the heart, are to show the utmost dedication that the giver of the sacrifice desires to show God. As David remarks in Psalm 51:16-17, “the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God, you will not despise.” — God desires the heart, and if the heart you wish to offer is the least of your flock, and the last of your time and effort, what is that to God? It is not your broken spirit you are offering, but the scraps of your table.

Do we not also do this? Especially in this time of pandemic when we are forced to offer our sacrifices and worship unto the Lord in front of a computer screen, do we do it with all our hearts? Do we put on our Sunday clothes, sit in front of our desks and act as if we are sitting amongst other saints, the heavenly choir of angels, and with the God of heaven and earth? Or rather, do we sit groggy from a late night with pajamas on and singing in half-asleep consciousness that are blind, lame, and sick with the debaucheries of gaming, movies, and food from yesterday? We would not even dress in such a way and act in such a way with our local government officials or job interviewers or professors!

What does our worship look like at this time of casting into the fire? We are only touching upon the fire of the Lord in this time of disease. This COVID-19 does not compare to the wrath that we deserve that will be released to all those who are not forensically declared righteous through the saving blood of Christ.

Truly, let us “now entreat the favor of God, that he may be gracious to us.” (verse 9). His favor was satisfied by the blood of Christ, and the greatest favor of His Fatherhood to us has been granted to us. Would we act as if we are truly children of the living God? Would we treat the most loving Father with such contempt and hatred?

O, brothers and sisters, let us love God, because He has loved us first (1 John 4:19).

Consider

1. Let us repent in all the different ways we have not given worship as we ought to have.
2. Let us ask the Lord to reveal ways in which we have given polluted offerings so that we may correct it.
3. Let us just thank the Lord.