Malachi 1:1: Introduction to Malachi
May 2, 2020
1 The oracle of the word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 
Today’s devotional will give a brief overview of the book of Malachi so that we can better understand the book as we read it. 

First off, the book takes place after the exile to Babylon, almost 100 years after Cyrus gave the decree in 538 B.C. that the Jews could return to their land.  One would think that after their exile (which was due to Judah’s unrepentant sin), the Jewish people would have fully repented and be filled with a passion for the Lord. 

However, this was not the case. In fact, the reason that Malachi gives this message is because the people of God were completely apathetic to the Lord. They served God in the temples, but their hearts and their lives did not reflect a fear or love for the Lord. 

Brothers and sisters, herein lies a very important truth. Oftentimes, we think that trials themselves draw us closer to the Lord and refine us. But we see here that after the great exile to Babylon, the people of God still did not have the right hearts in serving the Lord. Rather, it is learning to trust and depend on solely Jesus through these trials that refines us. In this trying time for many of us, let us pray that we do not remain stagnant; instead, let us grow in our love and trust for the Lord. 

This book is structured as a series of disputes. First, Malachi or God will make an assertion, and this is followed by a dispute from the people (signaled by the phrase “but you say…”). Then, this challenge is answered by Malachi or God Himself. 

Something to note in just this first verse is that the message is addressed “to Israel” (verse 1). This is interesting when you recall that the kingdom of Israel was split into two, Israel and Judah, during the reign of King Rehoboam (son of King Solomon). The message that Malachi gives is actually to the Kingdom of Judah. When calling these people “Israel”, it does not mean the northern kingdom of Israel but rather the people of God as a whole. Therefore, God is saying that the kingdom of Judah has the full promises of the people of God that were promised throughout the Old Testament.  

On a final note, the book of Malachi also paints a picture of the coming Messiah. As we study this book together, let us see how everything truly points to our Savior and King, Jesus Christ. 
