Malachi 1:10: The Name Above All Nations
May 6, 2020

11 For from the rising of the sun to its setting my name will be[a] great among the nations, and in every place incense will be offered to my name, and a pure offering. For my name will be great among the nations, says the Lord of hosts. 12 But you profane it when you say that the Lord's table is polluted, and its fruit, that is, its food may be despised.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Do we know who God is? 

Oftentimes, it is easy to think that we are doing God a favor by worshipping and serving Him. While our knee jerk reaction might be to quickly deny this charge, let us examine our lives carefully. Do we joyfully wait in anticipation for Sunday service, where together with our brothers and sisters, we are ushered into the throneroom of God? Or do we act like we can simply “squeeze” God into our schedule? Do we stay up late on Saturday night doing whatever it is we deem important, only to groggily attend church the next day and promptly fall back asleep again? Or even worse, do we only worship and serve the Lord during the Sunday livestreams and the Wednesday/Friday Zoom Bible studies, only to do whatever we want for the rest of the week? 

Brothers and sisters, do we know who God is? Do we know who it is that we serve? If we truly did, we would see it as an honor and privilege to serve the Lord. If we knew anything about who God is and who we are as sinners, we would fall to our knees in the greatest esteem everytime we come before Him. 

It is the “Lord of hosts” that we are serving! It is He whose “name will be great among the nations” (verse 11) that we have the privilege to love and worship! So let us get one thing through our hard heads, brothers and sisters. It is not God who has the privilege to receive our love and affection. Rather, it is us that have the great Honor to serve and love the Lord. 

Or perhaps we could put it a different way. What is it that we deem more worthy of our time than the Almighty One? Who is it that demands more love and affection than the God who is love? Do we dare to even attempt to give an answer? 

However, there is something even deeper in today’s passage. God declaring that His name “will be great among the nations” is not simply a declaration of His majesty; it is also a promise. One day, all nations will bow in reverence before the Father. The name that we now profane by serving God half heartedly — that very name will one day be held in the greatest esteem. 

Hopefully today’s passage puts it all into perspective. God is in no need of our praises and affections. As Psalm 50:12 says, “If I were hungry, I would not tell you, for the world and its fullness are mine.” 

And yet, Romans 5:8 says this: “But God shows His love for us in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us.” This is the scandal of grace! That the Sovereign Lord of all, to whom one day all knees will bow, would come and die for this creature from the dirt. That He, who was of no need for our love and affection, would die to show us His love and affection for us. That the Creator would die for His rebellious and blasphemous creation. 

Let us then ask ourselves once more: What is it that we deem more worthy of our devotion than our Savior? Who could we possibly love more than the One who died to show us His love? 


Consider

1. To what/whom is our greatest devotion? 
2. Let us take time to once again thank Jesus for what He has done. 