Malachi 1:2-5: God’s Love and Sovereignty
May 3, 2020


2 “I have loved you,” says the Lord. But you say, “How have you loved us?” “Is not Esau Jacob's brother?” declares the Lord. “Yet I have loved Jacob 3 but Esau I have hated. I have laid waste his hill country and left his heritage to jackals of the desert.” 4 If Edom says, “We are shattered but we will rebuild the ruins,” the Lord of hosts says, “They may build, but I will tear down, and they will be called ‘the wicked country,’ and ‘the people with whom the Lord is angry forever.’” 5 Your own eyes shall see this, and you shall say, “Great is the Lord beyond the border of Israel!”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Malachi is a prophet after the events of Ezra and Nehemiah, only a couple decades past the return of the exiles to Jerusalem. Israel has been restored though they had been sent into exile for their any sins against the Lord. Yet, from the words recorded by Malachi in verse 2, we can see that Israelites ask “How have you loved us?” to God’s declaration that He has loved Israel. 


This is perhaps one of the gravest insults to God any people of God can throw at the loving God of Jacob.


This is Israel. This is the nation chosen, not for any human, utilitarian reason, but for the sake of God’s unsearchable heart of unconditional love for His chosen people (Deuteronomy 7:7).


This is the people who rebelled against God even after having seen the mighty hand of God stretch out over the pharaoh (Exodus 14:11-12). These are the people who complained for water even after seeing the mighty waters of the Red Sea split in half for the Israelites to pass, only for it to swallow in whole the armies of Egypt (Exodus 17:2). This is the nation who committed idolatry even as Moses was coming down from the mountain to gift to the people the Law of the Lord (Exodus 32:1). These are the people who cowered before men to stand in defiance to God when they heard a report of the promised land that looked unfavorable to their blind eyes even with the columns of wind and fire still storming besides them (Numbers 14:2-4). This is the nation that asked for a king when they had the King of Kings reigning over them (1 Samuel 8:7). These are the people who violated all covenants to be expelled into Babylon (2 Chronicles 36:29-21).


Now, they have been restored by the Lord despite their many failures (even more that have not been accounted for here). They have been reestablished — the Lord once again dwells in the rebuilt temple (Ezra 6:14-18). They have failed over and over again only for the Lord to come to their rescue. A million times they have struck the Lord, a million times the Lord responded with kindness. Yet, the response God receives is the insolence of “How have you loved us?” (verse 2).


To this unimaginable disgrace and dishonor to the God of the universe, God responds. He responds! — instead of smiting them at the moment of their insolence and deprived sense of right and wrong, this God, the supposed Ruler of All, tones His voice down to that of the volume of man to speak to dust of the earth (Genesis 2:7).


His response must be understood properly for us to have any coherent interpretation of the rest of this book. The Lord explains Himself and says, “Is not Esau Jacob’s brother? [...] Yet I have loved Jacob but Esau I have hated.” (verses 2-3). God is holy, and He is sovereign. This is bad news for sinners like us as it means that in His holiness we are undone — we stand condemned. As all men have sinned (Romans 3:23), all stand condemned as well as wicked people, and those who are wicked, God hates (Psalm 11:5). Therefore, rightfully, God hates all men — yes, all the world. This includes Esau and Jacob as well. Though they were brothers, God chose to love one but not the other. In fact, though they were twins, of the same birth, from the same parents, at the same time, God chose one over the other. God is quite explicit in His hatred as well. He does not stop at “Esau I have hated.” but goes on from verse 3 to 4 talking about the extent of His hatred expressed as well.


If all men are to deserve the same punishment of Esau (and his descendents, the Edomites), why is it that God would choose Israel to be saved from His wrath and anger that they so rightfully deserve?


If any theologian is being perfectly honest, the simplest, and perhaps the most correct response they could give is “I don’t know”. Yes, of course, for the sake of His glory (Psalm 115:1), but why the Israelites? Why the Church? — we simply do not know. And it is good that is is so — for that is why the love of God to us is unconditional. Jacob did not merit it — nay, he deserved the opposite of it, yet God chose him to establish a people who would last all ages.


We, the Church, continue the line of the Israelites. We who were not God’s people have been called “my people” (Romans 9:24-26). We also do not know why we have been elected to be God’s people and to be saved from the wrath of God through the love of God to be presented to the joy of God, yet we do know we are to glorify God. As even our passage today indicates in verse 5, Israel will say “Great is the Lord beyond the border of Israel!”. We are part of that Israel, and we are to recognize the work of Christ that opened the doors to the citizenship of heaven to any nation. We serve a God who is not in need of a nation or a specific people to work, but need only Himself to do all the work of salvation. God has chosen His elect, not because we have come to a “secret knowledge” by our own attainment, nor because we were better than other people, but because God is great enough to love those who stand in opposition to Him.


Church, we once stood condemned before God, yet in His sovereignty and divine election, He knew us before we were even born, and chose us before we were in our mothers’ wombs, to bring us to Himself that we may shout and sing “Great is the Lord beyond the border of Israel!”. Will we truly do that as we live out another day in the light of our Lord?


If we are truly the elect, the House of Israel, let us not evoke to anger the Lord our unconditional lover as Judah had done, but let us, in the words recorded by Isaiah, “O House of Jacob, come, let us walk in the light of the Lord.” (Isaiah 2:5).


Consider

1. Have we ever thanked the Lord for choosing us despite our unfit nature?
2. How have the Lord spared us and loved us despite our many failures? What are some failures and sins we have committed before God that He graciously loved us through? How can we not commit them again but glorify God as the people of God we ought?