Malachi 2:4-5: Covenant to Levi Upheld by God 
May 9, 2020


4 So shall you know that I have sent this command to you, that my covenant with Levi may stand, says the Lord of hosts. 5 My covenant with him was one of life and peace, and I gave them to him. It was a covenant of fear, and he feared me. He stood in awe of my name.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


The Lord we serve is faithful and holy, merciful and just. In yesterday’s devotional, we looked at how God cursed the priests and smeared dung on their faces because of the dung they had offered to God in their polluted worship (Mal 2:3). God not only rebuked them and made their blessings ineffective, but He also rebuked their offspring as well. Today, we consider how God did not merely punish for the sake of revenge, but He also held fast to His perfect promise of life and peace.


Verse 4 shows that God, through purifying the Levitical priesthood, is acting so that His “covenant with Levi may stand” (Mal 2:4). God is not indifferent, but rather he is deeply involved and seeking to renew the priesthood in honor of His covenant with the tribe of Levi. In punishing the priests, God is also giving them yet another chance to humbly repent and bring them back into properly following His covenant. 


It is not exactly clear what the covenant with Levi specifically is, but there is mention of it in several other places in Scripture (Neh. 13:29). However, we do know from verse 5 that the nature of this covenant includes a posture of awe and fear of the Lord and a blessing of life and peace. Yet because the Levites could not stick to their commitment, God did not need to fulfill his promises. 


So how can this covenant with Levi stand? Once again, we are reminded that God is faithful in all of his covenants by fulfilling them through Christ. It is already such good news that God looked at a world that abandoned Him and still chose to enter into a covenant with them. But what’s crazier is that He himself fulfilled the commitments we needed so that we could receive our covenantal promises! Christ is the “offspring” of Abraham (Gen. 22:18) who brought blessing to the whole world, the Israelite who upheld the law in obedience (Heb. 4:15), and the King from the line of David who extended the Kingdom of God to all (Rev. 17:14). 


In the same way, even though God rebukes the future generations of priests, the covenant with Levi still stands because Christ has fulfilled it. Though the priests did not listen or take it to their heart to honor His name (Mal 2:2), Christ became the perfect High Priest who lived in complete submission to God and proclaimed the truth as a faithful witness to the world. Because of this, we inherit the blessing of being in Christ, who is life and peace. 


Christ brought about the truly purified and consecrated Levites in His followers, the Gospel preachers. Because of Him, we as Christians are now servants who can proclaim the truth of God! However, let us remember that this covenant is still one of fear and awe - for His sake let us faithfully walk in obedience. As we will see in tomorrow’s devotional, the lips of a priest ought to guard knowledge as a messenger of the Lord of hosts (Mal. 2:7). This is especially pertinent today, as we live in a time like the days of King Asa, where Israel was “without a teacher priest and without law” (2 Chr. 15:3). The inerrant Bible has been reduced to subjective moral teachings and sanctification has turned into mere personal development. Christains are not living without any dependence on God and advocating for unrighteousness deeds. The complete character of God has been redefined to conform to the desires of man! 


Brothers and sisters, let us look to Christ, who fulfilled the covenant to Levi and never compromised the truth nor turned others aside from the way (Mal. 2:8). 


Consider

1. In all circumstances, are you able to see the steadfast love and faithfulness of God, who has always upheld all his covenantal promises?
2. How would Jesus react to the teachings of today? Are you imitating Christ as part of his “holy priesthood” (1 Pet. 2:5)?