Malachi 3:6-7: God, the Only Constant
May 17, 2020

6 “For I the Lord do not change; therefore you, O children of Jacob, are not consumed. 7 From the days of your fathers you have turned aside from my statutes and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you, says the Lord of hosts. But you say, ‘How shall we return?’ 


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


“For I the Lord do not change” (verse 6) should be the most fearful thing any human being could hear. For as we read in the five verses that came before this passage, the coming of the Lord will be “like a refiner’s fire and like fullers’ soap” (verse 2). A refiner’s fire burns to dust any impurities and puts the ores into a trial of bearing the precious metals that live within. If the ore is naught but the impurities, it is burned up in the fire and the ashes tossed away. The fullers’ soap takes away the grime left on clothing to reveal the true nature of the clothing within. If the garment is beautiful and worthy, it will survive the hands of the fuller; if it is clothing rotten to every thread, it will fall apart in the scourging soap.

The Lord is immutable, and hence, He is the same God in the New Testament as He is in the Old Testament. He is the God whose hatred of sin destroyed the Egyptians, put to execution the idol worshippers (Exodus 32:25-29; Numbers 25:1-9), and even put Israel and Judah into exile (2 Kings 25:1-21). This means that He did not stand for sin yesterday, and He will not stand for sin today.

Yet, interestingly, we are given the second part of the verse 6, “therefore you, O children of Jacob, are not consumed” (verse 6b). This should make us pause. We had just read about a mighty fire hot enough to burn off stone and melt metal — yet, the sinful Jacob is not consumed? How can this be?

Fortunately for those who are in covenant with the Lord, for those who are loved for some unconditional reason, the fire will refine, rather than destroy. Yes, the fire will hurt, it will reveal what ugliness made up our disposition, but it will refine to bring out the beauty that has been regenerated within the hearts of the elect.

God does not change, and therefore, He will not change His mind to forget His promises to Adam (Genesis 3:15), to Abraham for (Genesis 12:1-3; 13:14-18; Genesis 15), His promises to David (2 Samuel 7:12-16), and more.

For us, the redeemed Bride of Christ, He will not forget His fulfillment of the covenant of works, and establishment of the New Covenant on that cross.

You see, those who have the covenant of Christ between themselves and God, those who have been regenerated, have within them the shining work of Christ that is more precious than any precious ore. In them is the righteousness that shines like clear glass (Revelation 21:21) that cannot be tarnished by the impurities that surround it. Unlike those outside of the covenant, those who are without God, whose wickedness makes up their whole being — with no precious metal to be found, the declared righteous (through the work of the cross) will enjoy the glorification through the removal of all their sin — the burning off of the dross.

Though Judah, at the time of Malachi, and us, in the new covenant, have “turned aside from my[God’s] statutes and have not kept them”, God, in His mercy and steadfast love, invites us yet again to Him, “Return to me, and I will return to you” (verse 7). For those who are in Christ, we can fall away, but God will never let us go. He looks on at us and speaks — “return to me”. This is the invitation of our Father to His joy. If we are His sons and daughters, how can we turn away from His welcoming arms?

To this good news, how will you respond?

Even with the vast riches of God’s Law revealed to them, the Israelites replied, “How shall we return?” (verse 7) as if they had never heard God’s words before. They were the chosen nation with the beauty of the Law to meditate on in every synagogue and the temple in Israel, yet they answer, “How shall we return?”. What a rebellious retort to the God of humility who chooses to speak to His own creation’s misguidance and fallacious ways? This is the chosen Judah! The supposedly great line of kings!

Yet, before we make any further judgment upon this nation of covenants, let us look to ourselves who have the fullness of the Law that reveals the very Word, Jesus. We have the full sixty-six books of divine revelation that make us to feel as if we are staring into the face of Christ Himself. Yet, have we not turned away from God in so many ways as well? If we have been given a greater revelation than ever before — one that would have made the prophets to widen their eyes in disbelief and kings to give up their riches for a piece of, should we not live more richly in the preciousness of God’s decretive promises?

Even now, the echoes of God’s Fatherly pleading can be heard for His chosen people of all nations upon the cries of the Messiah on the cross. “Return to me” He says, and if we hear His calling, shall we ignore the love of the shepherd? Let us be holy, brothers and sisters. Let us hear the Words of God speaking to us daily as we peer into scripture.

Lest we become like the Israelites in forgetting the love of God, let us love His word evermore to know and learn and relearn of the God who does not change.

“Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name give glory, for the sake of your steadfast love and faithfulness!” — Psalm 115:1

Consider

1. Do we know a God who does not change? A God who will stay true to His promises?
2. Have we ever thought of God as our loving Father who we turn our backs to like spoiled children?
