Malachi 2:8-9:  Covenant Broken by the Priests
May 11, 2020

8 But you have turned aside from the way. You have caused many to stumble by your instruction. You have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts, 9 and so I make you despised and abased before all the people, inasmuch as you do not keep my ways but show partiality in your instruction.”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


We touched upon what a true priest to the Lord ought to do in yesterday’s devotional. Today, we see how the returned priests from Babylon have done the opposite of what is assigned to them.

Instead of walking with the Lord “in peace and uprightness” (verse 6), they have “turned aside from the way” (verse 8). Instead of having “True instruction” and having “turned many from iniquity” (verse 6), they have “caused many to stumble” (verse 8). Instead of keeping the covenant (verse 5), they have “corrupted the covenant of Levi” (verse 8).

What is the consequence of this? God will make these priests to be “despised and abased before all the people” (verse 9). How much? He will do so “inasmuch as you do not keep my ways but show partiality in your instruction.” (verse 9) — as much as they have perverted the Law with both human favoritism and selectively obeying the commandments of God, they will be punished with the equivalent abasement.

Some people read these curses from God in the Old Testament as if it does not apply to their lives as well. They may say, “That was the Old Testament — God doesn’t curse anyone any more. He’s the God of love that loves everyone no matter what they do!”. For these people, a rude awakening awaits them if the God they believe is “the same yesterday and today and forever” (Hebrews 13:8). This is the same God who curses the Pharisees who had taken on the same rebellious attitude towards priestly duties in the New Testament. Even reading the one chapter of Matthew 23, one would get the sure sense that this God is a God who hates wickedness and curses all those who do wicked things (Psalm 11:5).

Yes, God hates covenant breaking evildoers, and this should rightly bring fear into our hearts as all men break our side of the covenant with God. Even us Christians are sinners who have worshipped God with a lacking heart, turned others away from the right way, stumbled others, and have corrupted the priestly covenant that we have with God — these verses apply as equivalently to us as it did to Malachi’s contemporary priests.

Of course, Christ has appeased us, and have completed in perfection His priestly duties to be imputed upon us to declare us as forensically perfect in the eyes of God, but does that mean we are off the hook?

We must understand that this passage is talking about and to the Levite priests. They are the specially chosen ones who know the Lord. Yes, God is talking to an Israelite people who may not actually know God, but He is also talking directly to a people who ought to know God. This means that God is talking to a people who have all the necessary means to know God, and perhaps know God. We, if we are truly Christian, ought to know God more than any Levite. We have the living Word of God at our disposal at our fingertips — we just read two verses of it! God is speaking directly to those who would know God — us, the Christians.

The foremost audience of this passage are the Christians who have forgotten and turned away from their priestly duties. That may be us. If so, we are in danger of being “despised and abased before all the people” (verse 9). This is certainly not a threat to our salvation for that is guaranteed for us if we are truly in Christ, but it should scare us and bring us to prayer if we are mature Christians seeking to become more like our Savior.

“Why should we fear being “despised and abased before all the people” — I do not fear man!”, one may say. And he would be right — but perhaps a little too impulsive in his answer. A mature Christian fears not the despising and the abasing of the self if it is for the gain of Christ (Acts 5:41). However, he also considers it loss and shame if their suffering and abasement came as a result of their evil works (1 Peter 4:15). We fear being “despised and abased” because of our fear for the glory of God to be hidden in the eyes of men because of our shameful acts. We fear that we have repaid the love of God with hatred.

God is our Father and He has shown us great love. What kind of a good son would spit on the face of a Father who adopted us into His great inheritance? If we had been put on a robe and a ring and a pair of sandals (Luke 15:22) that shows us to be sons and daughters of the living God, would we not act the part and desire to please our Father who has given so much to us? Would we not want to at the very least not shame the very God who loved us so much?

In our case in the passage, we see that this would be a shameful instance of being “despised and abased before all the people” (verse 9). Our evil ways would be revealed and the people would laugh at the so-called “priests” who are but playing grown up with linen ephods that do not fit our still milk-drinking bodies (Hebrews 5:12).

What shall we do then? We should pray the prayer of Moses on Mount Sinai in Exodus 32:12:
“Why should the Egyptians say, ‘With evil intent did he bring them out, to kill them in the mountains and to consume them from the face of the earth’? Turn from your burning anger and relent from this disaster against your people.”
We should beg the Lord, for your sake, for your sake, forgive us to realize our mistakes to turn back to proper worship!

Have we erred in any way in our worship to turn away from the Lord and to “turn aside from the way”, to have “caused many to stumble”, or “corrupted the covenant of Levi”? If so, let us repent and return to Him, for we have a forgiving God (Joel 2:12).


Consider

1. Let us ask for clear eyes that allow us to see if we have turned from the covenant given us in Christ that leads us to a royal priesthood.
2. Have we cared for our Father in heaven in our actions? Have we been careful to make sure our actions do not mar His name?