Malachi 2:10-12: Judah Profaned the Covenant
May 12, 2020


10 Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us? Why then are we faithless to one another, profaning the covenant of our fathers? 11 Judah has been faithless, and abomination has been committed in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the sanctuary of the Lord, which he loves, and has married the daughter of a foreign god. 12 May the Lord cut off from the tents of Jacob any descendant of the man who does this, who brings an offering to the Lord of hosts!


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



From God’s direct words, Malachi starts speaking to his fellow men of Judah. Throughout this passage, Malachi is urging and beseeching his brethren to once again come back to the Lord.


Malachi poses two rhetorical questions: “Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us?” (verse 10). These questions can be (and should be) answered simply by the audience by: “We have one Father — Yahweh. We have one Creator — Yahweh.” Assuming such responses, Malachi continues his rebuke to describe the wrongdoings of Judah and Israel. Specifically, the sons of Jacob have been “faithless” in many ways that profane the “covenant of our fathers” (verse 10). Both Judah, the chosen line of the Messiah, and Israel, the chosen people of God, have been committing sin against God in faithlessness (verse 11). Judah has been faithless as if a son usurping a father’s honor and respect, and Israel has been an abomination as if a vessel would revolt against its potter. Specifically, within our passage today, they have been (1) faithless to one another (verse 10), and (2) faithless to God (verse 11).


Firstly, God’s chosen people have been faithless in their serving of their fellow brothers and sisters. We have been called to love our neighbors by Jesus Himself (Matthew 22:39), and this is the same that Malachi is urging in verse 10. Malachi accuses the returned exiles of being faithless to one another which is an act of “profaning the covenant of our fathers” (verse 10; Leviticus 19:18). It is quite easy to be faithless to our fellow believers because it is so hard for us humans to be faithful in the first place. To be faithful, we must be loving, honest, patient, gracious, caring, and more, but to be faithless, we need only lack in one of those things. We need only get angry once for the wrong reason at our fellow brother in Christ, and we need only to ignore once the urgent request of a fellow sister to break our faith. Of course, from the text — from the exasperated tone of Malachi, we see that the breaking of faith was more than a one time occurence, but often the consequences are quite similar no matter the measure of our unfaithfulness. Because we were faithless once, we often lose friends, spouses, and even friends.


The covenants given by God are to ensure us a better life on earth — which is partly why we follow it, however, more importantly they also reveal, in a glimpse, some truths about God’s relationship with us as well. This is why Malachi starts off with the two questions about God’s identity (verse 10). If God is our Father and our Creator, why do we not respect our fellow Israelites as brothers and sisters, and as fellow precious creations of the Great I Am? If truly, Yahweh is our Father and our Creator, why do we not stay faithful to our loved Body of Christ as equal inheritors, and as perfectly-designed vessels for God’s work?


Secondly, Judah and Israel have not been faithful to their God. The great and first commandment is to “love the Lord your God with all your soul, with all your heart, and with all your mind” (Matthew 22:37-38). It is the great and first command because without it, the second commandment is impossible (Matthew 22:39), and because upon these two, all the Laws and the Prophets depend (Matthew 22:40). To profane the “sanctuary of the Lord” (verse 11) is to dishonor the worship offered to the Lord, and to marry “the daughter of a foreign god” (verse 11) is to honor a different god (that is, a false one for there is no other) in place of the true God of Judah and Israel. Particularly, Judah has married the women of other gods, which was forbidden in Exodus 34, to fall away from their fathers’ worship of Yahweh, to fall to the worship of their foreign wives.


In our generation, there is not as much physical idolatry, and perhaps not even as multitude of foreign religions as there were in the time of Malachi, but we worship foreign gods at a far more regular rate than the Israelites. Money, sex, visual stimulation, and even studies and success have become our gods that we are willing to marry into this culture of Babylon with. You may have heard this rant a million times from various youth pastors and stressed-out pastors who cannot seem to get their congregation to turn from their evil ways, but it cannot be stressed enough. God hates — abhors, detests, is disgusted by — your gods. The false gods of empty promises that are no different from the Baal-peor for which the Israelites were executed (Numbers 25:1-9). The Israelites worshipped these gods so they can gain sexual pleasures and supposed prosperity from the locals, and how are we any different? We turn to the stimulating images of the world of the famous actors and actresses clad (or often unclad) in the idolatrous representations of the false gods of money, sex, and more. Are we making money for the services of God, or are we making money our god? Are we studying for illumination of God in our studies, or are we illuminating our studies as god?


Let us behold the curse of verse 12 and tremble: “May the Lord cut off from the tents of Jacob any descendant of the man who does this, who brings an offering to the Lord of hosts!” This means that there are people who still go to church — “who brings an offering to the Lord of hosts” — who can be and will be “cut off from the tents of Jacob”. This is an echo of Jesus’s warning “Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord’ will enter the kingdom of heaven” (Matthew 7:21). Do you truly know the Lord and fear Him? Do you love Him because He has delivered you from such fear into His adoption? Do you want to please your Father because you have received so much that you have only to give?


O, let us all repent, for we are an idolatrous people — if we have turned, let us seek him again, for He is faithful though we are not.


Consider

1. What are our idols that we have sometimes passed off as “harmless” or even “okay in small doses”?

2. Have we loved our fellow neighbors?