1 John 2:1-2: Christ Our Advocate

May 29, 2020

1 My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. 2 He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


These few verses may sound like things that we already know, but they must be stored up as treasure in our hearts. John reminds us today that “if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous”. Commit this verse to memory, for there will come many days where this truth will be crucial as you are overwhelmed by the guilt of your sin. For while we grow in Christ, our frequency of sin may diminish, but the miserableness of our sin will intensify. 


The instant we are born again, our desires and affections are wholly transformed. We can no longer boast loudly of sins in front of our friends nor spend long hours planning out a sinful act without grieving our conscience. We quickly swallow the addictive pill of sin in the moment only to find a bitter aftertaste. As we journey toward the Light, we begin to spot stains of sin splattered everywhere in our lives. In every thought, in every motive, and in our daily masquerade, we realize that we are sinners not because we act sinfully, but we act sinfully because we are by nature such depraved sinners. And the closer we get with Christ, the deeper our guilt cuts and the sharper our betrayal stings.


The apostle John, now an elder, makes it clear to his congregation of “little children” that he is “writing these things to [them] so that [they] may not sin”. We must understand the filthiness of sin, corrupts all the love, the life, and the fellowship that John writes about. It is from here that we look back onto ourselves and see that we saints are still sinners, and mighty ones, feeding into the corruption of our fallen world. Brothers and sisters, you will battle the world, you will battle the devil, but you will also battle with the flesh, which is yourself! There will be a day where your wretched sin will haunt your growing spiritual sensitivities in a terrifying way. You will feel so disgusted, so worthless, so like an imposter to the faith! Your flesh may accuse you and ask After all these years of sanctification and are you back at square one? 


When days like these come, and surely they will, we must reach for this treasure of a verse: “if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous”. If we are to respond rightly, we must remember “square one” and remember how we first looked upon Christ our Advocate with nothing but helplessness. Fellow Christians, in our journey of sanctification, have we developed spiritual pride and found comfort in our own righteousness? Our sanctification is not our justification! We should want nothing to do with the righteousness of ourselves and everything to do with the righteousness of Christ - our spiritual progress should never replace the life, the death, and the resurrection of our Savior. Remember that the Advocate we had when we were first saved is the same Advocate we have today. Christ is not just our Advocate once; since John is writing to those already Christian, it must be that our Lord is our Advocate again and again. We should never think that we have fallen so hard or so often to have exhausted all opportunity to look upon Him another time. Oh the scandal of this grace, that when we think we have thrown it all away, upon Christ our sin is laid once more, for “he is the propitiation of our sins”! You may ask How is it fair that I am lavished with such grace? but remember that our advocate is Jesus Christ the righteous, and so He pleads for us in a way that is perfectly good. 


So when sin haunts and accuses us, let us remember how we turned our eyes upon Jesus when we first met Him and do it again! We are to look upon Him as a helpless and poor sinner. Shake off your spiritual pride daily. For without Christ, we are like Princetonians condemned and expelled by the Honor Code or elected officials exposed and incarcerated of their fraudulence. Do not think we are any better for our transgressions are far worse. Yet by grace alone we have an Advocate! So when sin comes to haunt you, run and hide in the rock of Christ for protection and sing Nothing in my hands I bring, simply to the cross I cling! And just as he brought us from dead to life, with hope we look upon Christ who will surely renew us in our hopelessness. Brothers and sisters, let us proclaim this loudly so that his scattered Church may hear: though he hates sin, Jesus Christ is a friend of sinners! He offers propitiation not only for my sin “but also for the sins of the whole world”!


Consider


1. When was the last time you were utterly crushed by the weight of your sinfulness? How did you respond? Should you have responded differently?

2. Do you struggle with the idea that you are unworthy to be forgiven once more? Or do you instead struggle with seeing a desperate need for an Advocate? Whichever it may be, pray about it and let the Lord renew your mind!