Malachi 4:5-6: Day of the Lord

May 24, 2020


5 “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the Lord comes. 6 And he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the land with a decree of utter destruction.”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


This is our last passage of Malachi, and hence, Malachi preaches forward to the event of the New Testament — these last two verses are full of the hope of deliverance.


Verse 5 starts off with the returning of Elijah. This Elijah is most likely the same messenger of chapter 3 verse 1, and he is the John the Baptist we see in the New Testament (Matthew 11:14). This Elijah will prepare for the Lord’s coming, the day of the Lord. He will announce to the world of the “great and awesome day of the Lord” (verse 5), and “he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers” (verse 6) so that in the day of the Lord, there will not be “utter destruction” (verse 6). What God is saying here in Malachi is that He will send Elijah to prepare the people so that they will be morally right with each other, and also with God — He uses the paternal relationship to show this (read the chapters prior and see that God has been continuously using decrepit human relations to show the fallen nature of man’s relationship with God).


We have talked about the “day of the Lord” a couple times in the past devotionals, but I want to now talk about it with anticipation for the New Testament in a bit more detail as we near the end of the Old Testament.


The phrase “day of the Lord '' is used a couple times throughout the Old Testament and the New Testament, and though some of them point to different immediate fulfillments, they ultimately prophesy the final day of the judgement, the Coming of Jesus. This is the same case in today’s passage — the “great and awesome day of the Lord” will be when Jesus finally unleashes His final judgement and those who of His Kingdom will rejoice while those outside will weep.


Yet, if this Elijah will truly lead Israel to turn to God and repent as verse 6 says, where is Jesus’s incarnation and ministry in this picture — where is the person to whom Elijah will lead people to? From the time of the coming of Elijah to the day of the Lord, it seems almost as if the transition is immediate — if the ministry of Jesus is so crucial in justifying those who will stand in judgement, why is this not included? Furthermore, if in chapter 3 verse 1, we have seen that the Lord would come into His temple, and “the messenger of the covenant”, Jesus, would come. This seemed to point to His first coming, not just a second — where is that first coming?


The day of the Lord, I believe, includes also the incarnation and ministry of Jesus. We must understand that the Second Coming is not equivalent to a “second ministry,” or a “second plan” of Jesus. That is, the Second Coming of Jesus is the completion of the work He has already finished on the cross. We understand the day of the Lord as the “already but not yet”. Jesus has established all righteousness and defeated death on the cross, and He has guaranteed life through His resurrection already, but not yet has He called His beloved and resurrected their bodies. Furthermore, as for the wicked, He has not yet tread them down (verse 3).


However, in addition to this later future event, I believe that Malachi is also referencing the end of the Jewish age that Jesus prophesied in Matthew 24-25. The Jewish covenant nation will come to pass in the destruction of the temple and of Jerusalem, and this will usher in the New Covenant age. This event did indeed happen very quickly after John the Baptist and the Christians who heeded Jesus’s warnings in Matthew were those who survived. In such a way, following the common pattern of the duality of prophecy, Malachi is foretelling of the destruction of Israel and the end of mankind — which makes sense concerning the accusations the Lord made against Israel in the last couple chapters. (Also look at Luke 21:20-24)


This Elijah in the New Testament is the final human prophet who will turn back the hearts of the Israelites to the Lord. He is the bridge between the Old and the New Testament as He preaches of the day of the Lord when prophets will no longer be necessary. When the work on the cross is complete, there will be a completion of the sovereign justification of those God has selected. However, for the wicked, this day of the Lord will also be the sealing of their demise — “utter destruction” (verse 6).


John the Baptist is this last prophet Elijah because after the cross and the Pentecost, God will talk to every chosen man, and he will talk to God directly. The heart of the Father will be turned to His Children, and their hearts will be turned to the Father (verse 6). John will be the bridge because he will be the last to speak the Law to men (notice that verse 6 is showing the Law in human relationship — meaning that not yet has God adopted the elect), for after, the elect will be adopted to be a son like Christ (2 Samuel 7:14), and God will write the Law in their hearts (Jeremiah 31:33).


This is the “great and awesome day of the Lord”. And for those who believed, the early Christians were the remnants of that day, and for current day Christians, they can look forward to that day of the Lord of His Second Coming.



Consider


1. Do you anticipate, eagerly await, and long for the day of the Lord?

2. If we are in the “already but not yet” of the day of the Lord, are we feeling the urgency that we should feel? Have we shared the Gospel to our loved ones and friends? Have we been holy and pleasing to God?

3. Let us reflect on the goodness of the finished work of the cross. It is finished!