1 John 1:8-10: Truth Compels Repentance

May 28, 2020


8 If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. 9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 10 If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In yesterday’s passage, we saw how a true believer walks not in the darkness, but in the light. In today’s passage, John tells of another mark of a true believer: the continual confession and repentance of sins. 


John begins this idea by mentioning those that “say [they] have no sin” in verse 8. When we read this verse, we may quickly excuse ourselves from this group of people, assuring ourselves that we don’t think in this manner. However, we must realize that when we do not confess our sins before the Father, we implicitly express that we have no sin. 


For those that do confess their sins, John assures that “[God] is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” John is not talking about being forgiven or no longer being unrighteous in the sense of justification. Jesus has died for every sin, once and for all, for those that believe in Him. 


What is the forgiveness and cleansing that John is talking about then? The key to understanding this lies in our relationship with God as believers. As believers, we are now to strive after holiness and Christ-likeness because we love Him and want to serve Him. And when we sin, this same love drives us to repentance because we have sinned against the one that we love and long to serve. Therefore, as believers, we do not repent in order to be forgiven and loved, but because we are already forgiven and loved. This is why the continual confession and repentance of sin is a mark of a true believer. 


Thus, the forgiveness and cleansing that John is talking about is in the sense of sanctification. What a great assurance we have in verse 9, then! The Almighty God has not only forgiven us of our sins, but promises to constantly renew us and cleanse us from our ongoing sins, that we may one day be holy. 


Brothers and sisters, in our struggles against sin, let us not lose heart! For God has not left us alone after saving us, but He has promised to ceaselessly cleanse us from our sins. Let us come before our Father this morning and confess our sins, that we may be renewed. 



 

Consider


1. Do you continually confess and repent of your sins? 

2. Do you feel alone or forsaken in your struggles against sin? 