Malachi 4:2-3: The Sun/Son of Righteousness
May 22, 2020

2 But for you who fear my name, the sun of righteousness shall rise with healing in its wings. You shall go out leaping like calves from the stall. 3 And you shall tread down the wicked, for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet, on the day when I act, says the Lord of hosts.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Princetonians in Christ, today marks the finish of another semester, faithfully led by our Lord! Many of us, with weary eyes longing towards summer clicked “submit” for the final time while sinking into a feeling of relaxation. Moments like these are great, and they remind us of the perfect peace we received the instant Christ removed the burden of our sin at Calvary. But brothers and sisters, when our eyes were fixed upon summer, were they even more so fixed upon Christ, our hope of glory? Is He truly the one whom we longed for the most? 



And now that we are finally finished, how has our carefree summer mindset affected our spiritual disciplines? Make no mistake, we should all enjoy a well-deserved break, but let us rest in Christ so that momentary comforts do not rob us of the joy we find in Him alone. Rejuvenate your slumberous mornings by preaching to your hearts the moment that you wake! In our newfound free time, let us intensify our communion with God in prayer and sink deeper into the splendor of Scripture.


Christian, what does the name of the LORD mean to you? We so easily forget that His name is so great that it inspires our fear. Verse 2 of today’s passage is addressing “you who fear my name”. When we think about the name of our LORD, we are reminded of the time it was gloriously proclaimed before Moses as he hid in the cleft of a rock. “Yahweh! Yahweh! A God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty” (Exo. 34:6). Immediately, Moses fell before the Lord, quickly bowing his head in worship! Here, upon witnessing Yahweh proclaimed at Sinai, Moses experienced a theophany, a manifestation of God. 


This theophany however was only a foreshadowing of the climactic theophany of Christ. When Christ proclaimed the name of Yahweh upon the cross, He proclaimed His Holiness, Righteousness, Love, Justice, Wrath, and all His other attributes in a way that far exceeded what Moses had witnessed. When Hebrews calls the Son the “radiance of the glory of God” (Heb. 1:3), do we comprehend the magnitude of this radiance? This is important to recognize when we read these verses from the final chapter of Malachi. Here, Malachi is addressing “you who fear my name” because they are those who understand that one cannot look at the sun without being blinded. To these people, Malachi proclaims Christ, “the sun of righteousness” (Mal. 4:2). 


Who is Christ, the sun of righteousness, and what does this mean for us? Malachi 4:2-3 says the sun of righteousness shall rise with healing in its wings. You shall go out leaping like calves from the stall. And you shall tread down the wicked, for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet, on the day when I act, says the Lord of hosts.


He is the Sun - There is a twofold meaning of Christ as the Sun. The Gospel of John tells us that “In him was life, and the life was the light of men” (John 1:4). First, Christ is the source of true life. We know very well that without the energy of the sun, our world would be lifeless. And so without Christ, the source of life, we are all dead in our sins. Secondly, like the sun, Christ is a light that illuminates in our world of darkness. Christ’s perfect sacrifice casts out sin the same way that light drives out darkness, and upon this light we receive the foundation of our faith. As C.S. Lewis puts it, we believe in the sun not only because we see it but also because through it we see all things. Christ, being our light, leads those who were “darkened in their understanding” (Eph. 4:18) to Him, who is truth. 


He emanates righteousness - Christ shines forth nothing but righteousness. He was completely righteous when he lived and imputed righteousness unto his Church when he died. Paul writes in 2 Corinthians “For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God” (2 Cor. 5:21). And tied together with Christ’s righteousness is his justice as well. As it says in verse 2, the sun “shall rise” and it surely will continue to rise until its righteousness burns fully in the great day of judgement against those whose condemnation is just.


He has healing in its wings - This is good news for those who fear His name. Because of Christ, unrighteous people who are otherwise blinded by the righteous Sun can find healing in His rays! Christ not only healed physical diseases, but He decisively defeated the spiritual sickness of sin. As Christ himself professed to the Pharisees, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick” (Luke 5:32).


He makes us leap - Before we received Christ, Malachi says that we were like “calves from the stall”, constricted in a pitch dark night. But when the sun rises, the calves can break free and leap towards the light ahead of them. This is a picture of our Gospel freedom from the moment we were saved up until now - we leap forwards with joy, no longer thinking about the stall we were once bound to but instead striving forwards toward nothing but the Light ahead.


He defeats the wicked - In this world, we see deep injustice. One can easily point out examples where the wicked prosper while the righteous suffer. Yet Malachi points to a moment where “you shall tread down the wicked, for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet”. We must read this carefully because this destructive punishment belongs to the Lord, who is Just; we see that the Lord says this will happen “on the day when I act”. When we crush the wicked below our feet, we are running through the aftermath of the Lord’s victory. On that final day, we will surely run as we, without question, marvel at the perfection of our Lord’s judgement. We shall run with joy as we celebrate His glory.


Brothers and sisters, within just these two verses we find the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Sun of righteousness, prophesied by Malachi over 400 years before it happened. 


Consider

1. In your Gospel freedom, are you leaping forth to Christ like the claves released from the stall? Preach to your heart and pray that you may fix your gaze towards Christ every morning!
2. How do you plan on spending your time this summer? Is your time ultimately centered around serving yourself or serving our Lord?