1 John 1:1-4: The Word of Life
May 26, 2020

1 That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning the word of life— 2 the life was made manifest, and we have seen it, and testify to it and proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and was made manifest to us— 3 that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us; and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. 4 And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

 

Today’s passage from verse 1 to verse 3 is one sentence, and it is a bit hard to work out without splitting it up into individual phrases or groups of phrases. I believe the ESV did a great job of parsing the punctuation-less Koine Greek into English, but some clarification is always helpful.

For this reason, below is an annotated version of the same passage:

1 That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning the word of life— 2 the life was made manifest, and we have seen it, and testify to it and proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and was made manifest to us— 3 that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us; and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. 4 And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.
The red highlight portion of the passage is what I will call the “content” of the epistle of John, and the purple highlighted portion I will call the “reason” for writing the epistle of John. The yellow and green portions are the explanations of the words “word” and “life” respectively.

Firstly, we can read the red portions as such: “concerning the word of life [...] that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you”. John is setting the stage and giving an introduction to what he will be talking about for the rest of the letter. He will be telling them of the “word of life” that they have “seen and heard”. They, most likely the witnesses to Jesus, chiefly the Apostles (as shown by the usage of the word “we”), will not only hold onto the Gospel for themselves, but will share it to the world — specifically to the brothers in faith. This shows the “content” of the message that John wants to convey in his letter to the brothers and sisters in the faith. This “content” is the “word of life” (verse 1) which allows us to recollect event in the Gospel of John when Peter testifies of Jesus having the “words of eternal life” (John 6:68).

Yet, what is this “word of life”? John explains quite well in two sections of his massive sentence. I will explain it by separating the “word” from “life” separately as John seems to explain in the yellow section the “word” (technically and syntactically, the whole of “word of life”, but for the form and simplicity, I will separate to show the component nature of his sentence) while explaining in the purple section, the “life” that modifies “word”.

The yellow section explaining “word” talks about this word as having been “from the beginning” — reminding us of “In the beginning was the Word” (John 1:1). In doing so, John is showing that this word that they want to proclaim to the readers is in fact Christ Himself — the Son of God. This is the Word who they have heard, have seen, and have looked upon and touched (verse 1) — the Son of Man. John wants to make it clear to the audience that this word that they preach is not just a theory that they worked out, or a knowledge that they have procured, but the Messiah Himself. From “which we have heard” to “[...] with our hands”, John is reiterating his Gospel, “the Word became flesh” (John 1:14). He sees that it is so important that this is the actual incarnate Jesus that John places these descriptive phrases in front of even the “content” of the whole letter.

Next, the green section describes “life”. If “word” was describing the person of Jesus, “life” here explains the essence of that “word”. As the “word” showed the way in which Jesus manifested, the “life” shows the completion of all things that happened as a result of Jesus’s manifestation. John, in the first couple words of verse 2, quite simply puts that the very essence of “life” was “made manifest”. Once again, John says “we have seen it” — and John is not being redundant, but He is being adamant. He is being adamant that not only was Jesus truly God who had also taken on flesh as shown in the yellow section, but in the green section, he shows that Jesus was also the giver of life, and in Him was life. There is nothing taken away from Jesus of His deity because He was truly man, and His life was not tarnished, but rather this life was communicated and given to mankind — “made manifest”. This was not some esoteric knowledge, but was something even the disciples could “see” and “testify” and “proclaim”. It was not mere facts or spiritual feeling, but “eternal life” that actually brings transformation — which only belongs to the Father, yet was made manifest to the Church. Quite readily, we can see that John is making an attack and a defense against the Docetists who believed not in the real incarnation, death and resurrection of Jesus.

Finally, in the purple section, we see the “reason” why John is proclaiming the “word of life”. John wants the readers to “have fellowship” with the rest of the Body. This fellowship is important not just because it is a comfortable group that people can hang out with. It is not a picture of a vibrant modern evangelical church with a coffee shop on the first floor and a basketball court in the annex. No, the distinguishing part of the fellowship as shown in our passage is firstly, that “our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ” (verse 3). The second part of this fellowship, as we will see later on, is again, not a “welcoming environment” but a striving love between the brothers and sisters, and a struggling towards the goal as a result of that love. This fact is emphasized again with the last verse of our passage — the reason they write can be summarized by saying that the believers write because it is in their desire to fulfill their joy in the fellowship with God and with the Body.

This is the summary and intent of John for this epistle. It is that the true word of life that shows a Jesus who actually lived and died and rose would be preached to bring brothers and sisters to God in fullness of joy.

Consider

1. Have we made Christ into a phantasmic character in a fantastic plot? Do we truly believe in a real Jesus?
2. What is the word of life?
