Malachi 4:1: Burning Like an Oven
May 21, 2020

1 “For behold, the day is coming, burning like an oven, when all the arrogant and all evildoers will be stubble. The day that is coming shall set them ablaze, says the Lord of hosts, so that it will leave them neither root nor branch.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

 
Today we begin the last chapter of Malachi, where the focus shifts to the great day of the Lord. The insolence and blasphemy of the Israelites is ushered out of the spotlight, and a glorious prophecy that pronounces hope for the righteous and judgement for the wicked is ushered in. 

Today’s verse has a very similar message: that the wicked shall no longer prosper and be arrogant, and they will instead be met with judgement on the day of the Lord. In recent times, the day of judgement has almost become a taboo topic in churches, with some avoiding the subject altogether. And on an individual level, some of us might not particularly care for the coming day of the Lord. However, this is the day that we are to look forward to the most —  the day where the Son returns in glory and the score is settled once and for all between the righteous and the wicked. 

Until now, the Israelites had complained about how the wicked prospered (Chapter 3, verse 15), leading many to question whether living righteously was worth it or not. But in today’s passage, God declares that judgement is indeed coming, encouraging the Israelites and all of us reading this morning to hold fast to what is good and true. 

God describes the day of the Lord as “burning like an oven” and a day that shall “set them ablaze” (verse 1). And when the wicked and unrighteous are met with this consuming fire, they “will be stubble” and will have “neither root nor branch.” What this means is that not a single wicked person can or will withstand God’s great judgement. Instead, they will be reduced down to nothing, along with everything else on this earth that they treasured so foolishly. 

Brothers and sisters, let us not think for a second that storing up earthly possessions for ourselves or chasing after the things that everyone else seems to pursue has any eternal value. The relationships, the careers, the internships that we look at so longingly now will one day join the wicked as being reduced to nothing more than stubble. But our service to the Lord and our work for the Kingdom will surely remain. 

Therefore, let us realign our focus this morning, brothers and sisters. Especially in this finals season, let us not work simply for the sake of our GPA’s or our future careers or for a sense of self worth. Rather, let us do everything for the King, for such works are the only things that will not burn up with everything else on the day of the Lord. 

Consider

1. At this moment, what are you anticipating the most? 
2. For what are you striving for daily? Is it to serve the Kingdom of God or for something else? 