Malachi 4:4: Law of Moses Kept

May 23, 2020

4 “Remember the law of my servant Moses, the statutes and rules that I commanded him at Horeb for all Israel.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


The longest chapter in Scripture is Psalm 119, which spans for 176 verses and celebrates the gift of the Law. Oftentimes, we hear Christians say that Psalms is their favorite book in Scripture, but we seldom hear the praises of Psalm 119 on their lips. Brothers and sisters, how often do we sing My soul is consumed with longing for your rules at all times (Psa. 119:20) or I open my mouth and pant because I long for your commandments (Psa. 119:131)? As we read in Malachi 3:6, God says “For I the Lord do not change” - this Psalm may come from the Old Testament, but it is never an “outdated” thing to delight in the Law! 



As the book of Malachi comes to a close, we see a final appeal in verse 4 to “remember the law of my servant Moses, the statutes and rules that I commanded him at Horeb (which is Mt. Sinai) for all Israel”. This includes the 10 Commandments and other rituals or customs that set Israel apart. These laws reflect God’s character, reveal His perfect will, and are a guide for how we can enjoy our life as our Creator had intended. They are an invitation to trust God’s wisdom, but more than that, God himself promises through the Mosaic Covenant that “if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession among all peoples, for all the earth is mine” (Exo. 19:5). God’s sure guarantee for the blessing of His people is found in the Law! In a time where Judah is accusing God for abandoning His people and withholding true justice, there are many reasons why Malachi aptly declares that they must remember the Law. 


The Law exposes fallenness - If Judah truly remembered the Law, and if her priests truly walked in righteousness, it would be clear as day that her Lord is truly slow to anger and full of mercy and grace. Throughout the disputations in Malachi 1-3, the people of Judah are proven guilty of dishonoring God with worthless offerings, formalistic worship, and idolatrous marriages. Not only have they naturally brought destruction unto themselves through these inherently detestable acts, but they have broken priestly covenants, sacrificial covenants, and marital covenants. When these people ask “Where is the God of justice?” or claim “It is vain to serve God”, it is clear that they have forgotten the Law. Brothers and sisters, do not forsake the law! When we look upon the Law, it is like a mirror that reflects our inability to be faithful partners with the Lord. If we fail to remember the law, we fail to see the fallenness that drives us to run to the cross where we find our strong and perfect plea.


The Law reflects the perfect will of God - Judah has truly forgotten the goodness of the Law. In her half-hearted pursuit of it, the Law has clearly become like a burdensome duty they must carry out to meet legal demands. These laws are not arbitrary! As we gaze upon God’s commandments, we have the privilege to witness His character, which ought to fill our souls with praise. Most evidently, they point to His Holiness; but on top of that, we see His Justice in the sacrificial laws, His Sufficiency in the Sabbath laws, His Faithfulness in the marriage laws, His Purity in the cleanliness laws, and His Grace in the sojourner laws. Brothers and sisters, when we read the Law or the 10 Commandments, do we just see things to “Do” and things to “Do not”? The Law was expressed to God’s chosen people in this way because they were so far from knowing who the Lord truly was. Yet because of Christ, who is the image of the invisible God (Col. 1:15), we are no longer like babies who are only warned with negative “Do not” commands. Since Christ has fulfilled the Law (Matt. 1:17), we now know one positive command which the heartbeat behind it all. As God had promised through Moses, the Holy Spirit would circumcise our hearts “so that you will love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul, that you may live” (Deut. 30:6). We now know that Malachi was right in both warning and encouraging Judah to stick to the Law - for through the Law and through Christ, we truly live fulfilled! 


Jesus said that “If you love Me keep My commandments” (John 14:15). Our Lord has given us many commands, and if we are merely trudging through them, we are missing out on something that ought to be our delight. We who are Christian, having experienced a new birth, now have deep affections for our Father and a desire to please Him. Remember that when the Lord told Ezekiel to eat the scroll, containing His words, it was “as sweet as honey” (Eze. 3:3). Brothers and sisters, let us remember the Law of Moses and sing loudly with the psalmist How sweet are your words to my taste, sweeter than honey to my mouth! (Psa. 119:103). 


Consider


1. When you think upon the commandments of our Lord Jesus Christ, does your heart leap forth in praise and joy like the psalmists in Psalm 119?

2. How are the attributes of God displayed through the Law of Moses?