1 John 2:18-19: They Were Not of Us
June 4, 2020

18 Children, it is the last hour, and as you have heard that antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have come. Therefore we know that it is the last hour. 19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. But they went out, that it might become plain that they all are not of us. 


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

When hearing of the antichrist or antichrists, we often imagine some figure out of horror movies. If Jesus was perfectly loving and good, then we imagine the antichrist to be a heinous, evil being that none will want to follow. This morning, let our view on the antichrist and antichrists be shaped by Scripture alone, rather than horror movies or our own imaginations. 

In verse 18, John indicates that there is not only an “antichrist,” but also many “antichrists” that have already come. We see from other parts of 1 John (1:7, 2:22, 4:3) that antichrists are those that deny that Jesus is God and that He came in the flesh. These antichrists are not the demon-like figures that are seen in horror movies; they are deceivers that can overturn a church from the inside out if proper doctrine is not upheld. 

What does this mean for us? First, we must be vigilant in our doctrine and what we believe. John makes it clear that antichrists will expose themselves in verse 19 by not “continuing” with the believers in their faith. That is, the best defense against such antichrists is to be firm in what we believe as Christians and to continue to live out the faith in steadfastness. 

Brothers and sisters, how can we do this if we do not constantly read and study the Word? How can we constantly be rooted in the truth if we do not daily return to the Scriptures, the source of truth, in meditation and prayer?  It is not enough to simply hear the Word on Sunday or read these devotionals in the morning, for we have the rest of the days to be swayed by the teachings of this world and of the antichrists. Rather, we must constantly root ourselves in the truth of the Word. 

And how can we stand together as believers and see those who go out from among us as antichrists (verse 19) if we do not have fellowship with other believers? Let us not stand alone on an island, ready to be swayed to and fro by the surrounding waves. Rather, let us all seek fellowship with one another, brothers and sisters, that we may build each other up and hold steadfastly to the faith together. 

The second thing for us to note from all of this is that “it is the last hour” (verse 18). Many deceivers have come into this world already, leading to great distortions of the Christian faith. Many calamities have overtaken this world, leaving all of creation groaning for the return of the Messiah that will restore everything perfectly. 

Therefore, brothers and sisters, let us keep watch for the return of our Lord. Let us not be like those among the ten virgins that were unprepared for the coming of the bridegroom (Matthew 25:1-13), but instead let us daily prepare ourselves for His return. As the bride of Christ, let us beautify ourselves for this great day by letting the Holy Spirit sanctify us daily. 

The hour is soon. Let us wait in anticipation for the return of our King. 


Consider

1. Do you study the Word for yourself and deeply meditate on it?
2. Do you have fellowship with other believers (not just friendship, but building one another up in Christ)? 
3. Are you ready for the return of the Messiah? 