1 John 3:1-3: Children of a Loving Father

June 9, 2020

1 See what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we should be called children of him. 2 Beloved, we are God’s children now, and what we will be has not yet appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is. 3 And everyone who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

How truly beautiful and marvelous is it that we can call ourselves children of God. As David proclaims in Psalms 8, “When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have set in place, what is man that you are mindful of him, and the son of man that you care for him.” It really is mind-boggling that God who is Holy, Righteous, and Almighty would care for His creation. Now John leading up to and at the start of Chapter 3 emphasizes the significance of the love God has given specifically to His children.

It is imperative we understand that not everyone is a child of God and thus not everyone is loved in this manner by God. John makes this clear when referring to “us”, the ones who the Father has given His love to, as “children of God” in the first verse. Additionally, John 1:12 clarifies that the children of God will not be everyone but those who receive and believe in His name, “But to all who did receive him, who believed in His name, he gave the right to become children of God.” This love, as mentioned at the very start of verse 1, was given to, or bestowed on, us. Hence His love is not something we worked hard to get and can be prideful about but rather a gift to magnify His Grace. John takes a second to be enamored with the magnificence of God’s love since it truly is breathtaking and worthy of emphasis. I think it would be fruitful if we did the same.

Now the kicker is in the second part of verse 1: “The reason why the world does not know us is that it did not know him.” This isn’t the first time John alludes to the motif that being both of the world and rooted in Christ is not compatible. In the previous chapter he emphasizes that we should “not love the world or the things in the world” since if you do, “the love of the Father is not in him.” (1 John 2:15). John makes clear why the world does not know us, “[the world] did not know him.”  Conceived in iniquity, the hearts of man oppose God and seek what is sinful as a result of original sin. However, through Christ alone we die to our old self and are regenerated, conforming to the image of Christ. Although we still succumb to sin, by sanctification we start loving what He loves and hating what He hates. This is not a change of attitude or lifestyle but a complete change of heart which marks a distinction between those who have truly been regenerated through Him and those who have only changed superficially.

Unfortunately, evangelical churches today focus more on giving a message about how much one can be like the world while still being a “Christian” since they are worried that sermons proclaiming our need for God and our inability to do anything with our own strength will be poorly received. Hence the gospel message is often twisted or watered-down to undermine and even affirm the sinful, enjoyable ways of the congregation in order to tickle their ears, using Jesus as a means to temporarily fix these issues. (2 Timothy 4:3)

I pray that the evangelical church will be cleansed of this unbiblical, pragmatic approach. As John emphasizes time and time again, there is a major difference between the world and those who abide in Him. As Jesus elaborates in John 15:18-19, “‘If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before it hated you. If you were of the world, the world would love you as its own; but because you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.’” 

What we need is not a message that caters to the contemporary carnal heart which says you can call yourself a Christian and continue to live like the world, having sex outside of marriage, but a message that emphasizes how, as John mentioned in 1 John 1:6, regardless of your claim to abide in Him, if you walk in darkness the truth is not in you. The focus should not be on trying to make Christianity more likable for the world but on how much the world needs Christ. All that a Carnal Christian message does is create falsely assured Christians who think that the prayer they once prayed a long time ago to let Jesus come into their hearts or the time they got on their knees filled with emotion while singing a worship song is sufficient to be a Christian. This isn’t loving at all. This is blasphemy that leads to people falling away from the faith once they go to college or don’t find the flashy worship services entertaining anymore. Let us not conform to the world but acknowledge, as John mentions, why the world will not know us.

Being children of God does not mean that on this earth we will experience wealth or good health. It does not even mean that God has a “wonderful” plan for our lives in terms of worldly standards. God’s “wonderful” plan for Stephen was for him to be stoned and for Peter it was for him to be crucified upside down. The main point I am trying to get across is that we should not conflate being a child of God with worldly prosperity. The greatest gift is that, as John elaborates in verse 2, “when he appears we shall be like him.” However, to be like Him does not mean that we will be identical to Christ and omniscient or omnipotent but rather without sin and without any imperfections. So when the world persecutes you for abiding in Him and upholding the truth, have assurance that “what we will be has not yet appeared” for we know that in Him we will have a much sweeter gift for all eternity: being with Him in perfect quality. 

Finally in veres 3, John delivers a simple yet encouraging message: “everyone who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure.” Since we know our eternal destiny from the promise mentioned in verse 2, John exhorts us to live with an ultimate hope solely in Him. With childlike admiration and reverence of God’s love for us, let us all continue to live our lives more like Jesus, conforming to his image in anticipation for the moment we will be with Him.

Consider

1. How has the gracious gift of God’s love been manifested in your life?

2. How does the eternal assurance that John presents for those who abide in Him affect your actions in the present?

3. In what ways are you conforming to the image of Christ?