1 John 2:15-17: Do Not Love the World
June 3, 2020

15 Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 16 For all that is in the world—the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and pride of life—is not from the Father but is from the world. 17 And the world is passing away along with its desires, but whoever does the will of God abides forever.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Are you in love with the world? 

This has become such common rhetoric for so many Christians that when we read this question, we may be tempted to simply answer “no” and move along. However, we see today that John does not simply say “do not love the world,” but he instead elaborates on what this truly means. Perhaps, then, it is best for us to take a closer look at this question as well. 

First, John begins with the firm statement in verse 15 that anyone who loves the world does not have the “love of the Father.” Note that what is in contention in this verse is our love. We will serve the one that we love, and we either love the Father or the things of this world. Brothers and sisters, let us choose today whom we will love and serve, for we can only choose one: God or the world. 

But what does “loving the world” really mean? John tells us in verse 16 that it is to have “the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and pride of life.” That is, loving the world means to long and chase after the sinful, enticing ways of this world and abide by its principles rather than God’s. It is to build our life around the worldly idea of puffing ourselves up with achievements and social status rather than advancing the Kingdom of God. It is to cave to the growing desire to get drunk or to have sex rather than submitting before the Father and asking the Holy Spirit to help us when we are tempted. It is to take and eat of the apple as Eve did in the Garden of Eden because it was a “delight to her eyes” (Genesis 3:15). 

So let us carefully ask ourselves again this morning. Are we in love with the world? 

Do we define success as the world does? Do we think highly of the one that commits each day to lifting up the banner of the Kingdom of God, or do we instead hold the brightest, kindest, most charming people in the highest regard?

Do we define Christianity as the world does? Do we think that we are good Christians because we act kindly, hang out with other Christians, and don’t curse, drink, and party like others do? Or do we instead set our standard of Christianity to be Christ Himself, where we are ever desiring to become more like Him? 

Finally, let us remember the great folly in loving the world. We mustn’t view the things of this world as desirable, only restraining ourselves because God told us not to chase after such things, like a dog on a leash. Rather, we must see the folly in loving the world in order to stop loving it. 

In verse 17, John tells us of this folly: “the world is passing away along with its desires.” Brothers and sisters, whenever we are tempted to love the world, let us look through the lens of eternity and see that nothing will remain but what we have built up for the Kingdom of God. Let us remember that in the lens of eternity, nothing matters but how we love and serve the eternal God. 

Consider

1. Let us commit this morning to loving and serving God alone. 
2. Are you in love with the world?
3. Do you truly see the folly in loving the world?