1 John 2:7-8: The Old but New Commandment

May 31, 2020


7 Beloved, I am writing you no new commandment, but an old commandment that you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that you have heard. 8 At the same time, it is a new commandment that I am writing to you, which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



John writes to his readers of a new commandment that is at the same time an old commandment. This commandment, as we see from just a verse prior, is to “walk in the same way in which he walked” (verse 6) — to walk as Christ walked. Namely, as John further expands on this in the passages to come, this is to love the brothers, the Church, as Christ also loved the Church.


How is the command to love the brothers an old commandment? It is old because it is “the word that you have heard” (verse 7). As all Christians have heard the word — the Gospel that shows the deepest of all loves, and the depths of the execution of such love, they have received the old commandment that they should have kept even until now. Not only that, but it is also the commandment that has been decreed even since creation. If the Christian recognizes that the belief they hold is the continuation of the covenants of love given by God since the beginning of time, then they would also understand that even before they received the Gospel, and even before Christ was glorified, God had been constructing His cogent plan of love from the beginning of time.


Yet, how is it a “new commandment”? It is a new commandment because it is something to be told day after day, and practiced all the more hour after hour. It is new because “darkness is passing away” even still as it is a continuous process while the “true light is shining” (verse 8). It is a new commandment because every morning God’s mercies are new. Christ has overcome to ensure the fullness of light in the new heaven and earth to come and now the darkness will in time dissipate forever. In Christ’s love we have seen the new way of living, and hence, we will take on the new man instead of the old and remind ourselves of the commandment (Colossians 3:9-10).


In such a way, the command that we have been given to live as Christ lived is a commandment that is old in looking back to what has already been completed on Calvary while also new in the sense that it is looking forward to live out what we have already been consummated into.


We must understand that for the regenerate, for the saved, “the darkness is passing away” (verse 8). The fate of the sins that linger still within the cleansed sanctums of our hearts are predetermined. Though they seem to still wound us and claw at our being, those grasps and snares are but the desperate, final tremors of our old selves dying in the “true light” that already shines (verse 8). The true light shines within us, but we must not let our sinful old selves take shelter in the shadows of our being — we must let shine the light of Christ to every corner of our once dead hearts so as to allow for a sanctification that will bring healing.


This is not a facile task. It is one filled with internal skirmishes and artillery barrages against our own evils that plague the soul. Our enemy will say, “Did God actually say you should fight so hard against something so seemingly trivial? It seems like so much loss for so little gain!” and our old selves with piqued ears will reach for the forbidden fruit. It is at this moment that we must deafen the whispers of Satan with the mighty roar of the cannons of Christ’s victory cry, “It is finished” (John 19:30). If we truly believe, and remind our renewed souls that Christ has done what we could not, we will look to Christ to say, “Help me, O Lord my God!” (Psalm 109:26-27). It is a battle, but we have the Lord who is better than any horse or chariot (Psalm 20:7).


O, may we not cover the shining light so as to entertain the shadows. May we not eclipse the foretaste of our glorification for the substandard junk food of the devil.


For we are a shining city that cannot be covered (Matthew 5:14). May we love like Christ loved even when it means fighting against our very selves. Even when we must love those who have wronged us, let us do it knowing that Christ died for His enemies (Romans 5:10). Furthermore, even when we cannot see how our internal sin may damage the Church — a sin hidden from sight, only behind closed doors, let us remember the Church for we are one Body, and if one part of the Body suffers, even in the stillness of night, then all the Body aches.


Let us remember that our commandment is as old as our new birth and as new as tomorrow. Brothers and sisters, let us not hide in darkness that which must shine.


Consider


1. What are some sins we have had hidden?

2. Let us repent and ask God for forgiveness.