1 John 4:1-3: Test the Spirits

June 18, 2020

1 Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, for many false prophets have gone out into the world. 2 By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God, 3 and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God. This is the spirit of the antichrist, which you heard was coming and now is in the world already.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, John gives a test for the spirits that are in our world. This is not simply something to gloss over quickly as we read because we think that it is “mystical” and doesn’t have much to do with our own lives. This passage, just like every other passage of Scripture, is “breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness” (2 Timothy 3:16-17). So what should we take away from this passage?


First, on a basic level of understanding, we mustn’t be so quickly amazed and convinced by spiritual displays and experiences. Similarly, we mustn’t be swayed by new doctrines and teachings on Christianity because they sound convincing enough and we like what we hear. Rather, we must test every spirit, lest we be swayed by the “spirit of the antichrist” (verse 3). 


And John tells us how to test the spirits: by seeing if they “confess Jesus” and the truth about Him (verse 2). It does not matter how “mystical” or “spiritual” of an experience that we have. It does not matter how convincing a new teaching may seem. If those teachings and experiences do not affirm the truth about Christ as seen only in the Scriptures, they are from the antichrist. Therefore, brothers and sisters, let us vigilantly defend the truth about Christ, His teachings, and His Word.


But if we look deeper into this passage, we can see that it applies even more directly to us. And it does so when we ask ourselves what spirit is dwelling within us. Do we have the Spirit of God within us or do we not? 


As John says, any spirit that confesses Jesus “is from God” (verse 2). But this is confusing because Jesus Himself taught that “not everyone who says to [Him} ‘Lord, Lord’ will enter the kingdom of heaven” (Matthew 7:21). And from our own experiences, we know that there are those who profess Christ and claim to know Him when their lifestyles would suggest otherwise. 


The key lies in the word “confess.” John used this word earlier when talking about confessing our sins (1 John 1:9). When using “confess”, John does not simply mean an expression of words but rather an expression of the heart. Just as we do not confess sins only with our lips but with our hearts, we confess who Jesus is with our hearts as well. 

What does this mean? We do not simply “admit” that Jesus is God and that He is the Messiah, but we truly believe it such that we bow down in reverence and submission before Him. Let us then ask ourselves: do we see a reverence and submission to Christ in our own lives?


This morning, let us examine our own hearts, brothers and sisters. Let us honestly ask ourselves whether the Spirit of God dwells within us or not. In other words, let us ask ourselves if we are living a life of reverence and submission before Jesus Christ and His teachings. 



Consider

1. Does the Spirit of God dwell in you? 
2. Does the confession of your heart match the confession of your lips? 