1 John 3:11-13: World Hates the Righteous
June 12, 2020

11 For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. 12 We should not be like Cain, who was of the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his own deeds were evil and his brother's righteous. 13 Do not be surprised, brothers, that the world hates you.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 

As Christians, what John writes in verse 11 goes without saying: we should love one another! This love that we have is the very Love “that we have heard from the beginning”, the Gospel message given by the apostles. We must never taint the perfect Love of God by separating the two. Our Love is defined by the Gospel; if we instead take our own understanding of love and twist the Gospel message around it, we become like the antichrists, who miss the joy of knowing the Love of God altogether. For the true Love of God is powerful, and its fruit testifies to the glory of Christ. Remember Jesus said that “by this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another” (John 13:35). Brothers and sisters, let us not assume that we are loving if we merely refrain from hate. Love is active - it should shine forth from us so that the world can see the character of Christ displayed in His Body of believers. Let us take initiative! Let us love, even if we do not feel like it in the moment, for the Love that we have received is unconditional. 

When we act out this Love, something we should expect is hate from the world. After all, the foundation of our belief is completely different from what the world believes. This is why Jesus tells us in verse 13 “Do not be surprised, brothers, that the world hates you”. Although a hateful response from the world is the norm, we must not actively fish for this hate! We must pray for the wisdom to discern how to balance between our compassion for the world and our commitment to an undiluted Gospel truth. Nonetheless, we will be hated because the true Gospel is offensive to an unrighteous world. But at the same time, the hate we receive will partly be because of our own mistakes. In many cases, because of our sin, we will have a degree of ignorance and self-righteousness even if we are well-intentioned. We must not be self-righteous, for we are saved by grace alone, but at the same time, we cannot let the accusations of the world defeat us, for once again, we are saved by grace alone. Let us learn wisdom from our mistakes and continue to make every effort to proclaim the Gospel as we look to Christ!  

In order to illustrate the reality of the world’s hate, John brings up the example of Cain and Abel in verse 12. John writes, “We should not be like Cain, who was of the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his own deeds were evil and his brother's righteous.” If we look back to the protoevangelium, or the prophecy given by the LORD in Genesis 3:15, we realize that because of sin there will exist an enmity between the offspring of the serpent and the offspring of the woman. How can the serpent have offspring? John explains here that Cain was “of the evil one”. In other words, Cain was the spiritual offspring of the serpent. Immediately after the protoevangelium, we see the prophecy unfold as Cain murders Abel, leaving his blood crying out from the ground to the Lord (Gen. 3:10). This wretched incident paints a picture of hopelessness, as if the serpent crushes the offspring of Eve. 

Yet for Christians, though we may face the crushing blows of the world, we can look to Christ, our blessed hope (Titus 2:13)! Abel may have been crushed, but Eve conceived of Seth and said, “God has appointed for me another offspring instead of Abel, for Cain killed him” (Gen. 4:25). Through this line of Seth came Christ, the “offspring” who decisively defeated the serpent and his offspring. Furthermore, Hebrews says that the blood of Christ “speaks a better word than the blood of Abel” (Heb. 12:24). While Abel’s blood condemned Cain, Christ blood, when sprinkled on us, advocates for us because of His righteousness. Because of Christ, our love is victorious against anything the offspring of the serpent may scheme of in this final hour. 

Brothers and sisters, walk in love! Do not be like Cain, who caused evil to multiply, but be instead like Christ, who is the blessing that multiplies throughout the Earth!

Consider

1. What are some ways you can love your brothers and sisters in Christ? What are some ways you can love the world that does not yet know Him?
2. Has your walk of love been met with hate? If not, are you prepared to “not be surprised” when it comes? 
