1 John 3:14-15: Death into Life, Murderers to Worshippers
June 13, 2020

14 We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. Whoever does not love abides in death. 15 Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 

Brothers and sisters, are we loving each other? Our call to love cannot be overstated. Some of us may think they are loving but fail to understand what love requires. Others, in their flesh, find it difficult to love out of joy rather than duty. Let us all diligently pursue this fruit of Love, for Jesus himself said that it is the greatest commandment (Matt. 22:34-40). Although through the Holy Spirit we are inclined to love, through our flesh we will still struggle to love. After all, if Christ-like Love was an effortless endeavor, and if the Christian’s greatest commandment was easy to follow, wouldn’t the Christian life be without trials and tribulations? If Love was easy, would it really be a commandment? 

To be clear, when we are born again, Love is not completely foreign to us. John writes in verse 14 that “We know that we have passed out of death into life”. In fact, the Holy Spirit gives us new affections so that it is our desire to love because Christ first loved us (1 John 4:19). However, there will be times where we do not feel like loving and times where our love will be mixed in with our sin. Still, though we may fail, the Holy Spirit will sanctify us as we strive towards loving our brothers. In fact, John writes in verse 14 that we can know that we are saved because we love the brothers. On the contrary, we may not be saved if we do not love our brothers because John writes “Whoever does not love abides in death”. 

Why do we Christians love our brothers and sisters? Preacher Charles Spurgoen gives several compelling reasons we must consider. First, we love for Christ’s sake. Christ has done so much for us that we would do whatever he says because we know that He is Good. We also love for truth’s sake. Regardless of who it is, we love the Christian because of the truth he preaches and because his life story is filled with Christ. And of course, we love simply for their own sake. We stand alongside them when they are persecuted and share in their sufferings because we are all children of the same family. Let us love Christ so much that our love spills over to all who delight in Him! By the power of the Holy Spirit, let us knock down our barriers of bitterness, social anxiety, and indifference; let us imitate Paul, who is “affectionately desirous” to be in the company of his brothers and sisters (1 Thes. 2:8). 

We must not only be filled with love, but we must also drive out hate. John makes this clear in verse 15 as he writes “Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer”. This is no exaggeration, for you have heard that Christ himself said “whoever murders will be liable to judgment.’ But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable to judgment” (Matt. 5:21-22). Brothers and sisters, do we recognize how grievously we sin when we are consumed by hateful intent? Hatred can be shown passively too! If we contemptuously ignore our brothers, have they not been murdered in our minds? Do not let hate take hold of you, for John writes “you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him”. If we abide in hate, we simply do not abide in Christ.

As Christians, we have passed out of death into life. We were once murderers for the sake of ourselves and are now being murdered for the sake of Christ. When John writes “because we love the brothers”, he uses the word apage for love - we are to love our brothers with the very love Christ had for us. This echoes the new commandment Jesus gave us: “just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another” (John 13:34). When we consider the body of Christ broken for us and the blood of Christ spilled for us, let us remember that this is the very agape-love we are called to share with our brothers.

Consider

1. Have you neglected the calling to love your brothers and sisters in Christ recently? I know that I certainly have. Let us pray about this and become a family of believers that takes the initiative to live out the Love of our Lord.
2. Is there any brother or sister that you are called to love right now? What are some ways that you can love them?
