1 John 4:4-6: Overcome the Spirits

June 19, 2020

4 Little children, you are from God and have overcome them, for he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world. 5 They are from the world; therefore they speak from the world, and the world listens to them. 6 We are from God. Whoever knows God listens to us; whoever is not from God does not listen to us. By this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


It is such great news that though we are merely “little children”, in Christ we have overcome all the rulers and authorities and all the philosophies and cultures that fight against the Truth. Brothers and sisters, this is by no means a trivial feat! Apart from Christ, all of creation is heavily subdued by Sin, serving it as slaves (Romans 6:16). Its constant and vicious attacks have left Man dead and depleted of all satisfaction. It has crept into the very heart of Man so that he cannot even choose to fight against the dominion of the Evil One. Yet here, John writes that He who is in us exceeds the formidable might of this world.


Each of these three verses contain three parallel statements about how it is certain that we have overcome Satan and his antichrist spirits. Verse 4 makes a claim that verses 5-6 serve to support. Christian, reflect on the truths in verse 4, that “you are from God and have overcome them, for he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world”. 


You are from God - In order to convince us that we have overcome the powers of this world, John begins by affirming our identity. This idea is emphasized again in verse 5, which begins with “they are from the world” and verse 6, which begins with “we are from God”. This distinguishing factor is what makes all the difference. Let us never forget that we have been born again and that this new birth is “not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God”. It is because of this new birth that we have gained the ability to choose the righteousness of God over Sin. Those who are “from the world” cannot even muster to lift a finger against sin because of the bondage of their will. But since we are “from God”, we now may prevail against Sin because our allegiance is to Him. Before even discussing anything about overcoming the world, John reminds us that the first step is our regeneration. 


You have overcome them - Verse 5 elaborates on what this means. These antichrists “speak from the world, and the world listens to them”. In other words, antichrist spirits say things that are alluring to the ear and nudges the world to cave into its unrighteous temptations. While we may still feel such temptations tugging at our hearts, it is sure that we have overcome them. No assault of this world will ever knock us off of His everlasting arms. This is because our ears also listen to the Word of God; John writes in verse 6 that “Whoever knows God listens to us; whoever is not from God does not listen to us”. Now this does not mean that we will never be deceived. After all, if that were truly the case, there would be no need for John to write such warnings to these “little children”. However, what this does suggest is that as we continue to walk with Christ, we will slowly overcome all deception and abide wholly by his Word.


He who is in you is greater than he who is in the world - This powerful truth should fuel us with much confidence! Let us never forget that within us is the sovereign indwelling of the Holy Spirit. There is nothing greater than God, and so there is nothing greater than He who is abiding in us Christians. Verse 6 ends by stating “by this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error”. Those whose hearts yearn to listen to the Word have the Spirit of truth, and this Spirit of truth demolishes any spirit of error that might dare come against it. Even if Satan decided to channel every ounce of his might against us, it would be, as evangelist Paul Washer puts it, like an imperceptible flea trying to topple a concrete wall.


Brothers and sisters, take heed to these encouragements! John does not write these things for no reason. He has written again and again that we would be hated by the world and that we are called to love when loving is difficult. Let us remember these verses so that we can fight on with the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. 


Consider


1. What spiritual battles have you been fighting? 
2. How can you overcome the spirits that seek to subdue you in this final hour?