1 John 3:21-22: Confidence Before God
June 16, 2020

21Beloved, if our heart does not condemn us, we have confidence before God; 22 and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 

Abiding in Christ is not staying attached to the world, begrudgingly reading the Bible and watching sermons on Sundays just to check off the daily requirements to suffice as a good Christian. It should not be a message of continually holding yourself back from your love of everything in this world and forcing yourself to do what you do not enjoy: becoming closer to God. For as 1 John and the rest of scripture clearly states, if you are truly regenerated in Him, your enjoyment in the ways of this world will start to fade and be replaced with a passion to be more like Christ. As the famous hymn goes, “Turn your eyes upon Jesus, Look full in His wonderful face, And the things of earth will grow strangely dim, In the light of His glory and grace.”

The primary message, that rightfully must be reiterated, John is giving to Christians is to conform to the image of Christ. Now his focus specifically from Chapter 2 verse 28 to the end of Chapter 3 is the children of God, providing both assurance and clear distinctions of true children. At the start of this passage in verse 11, we see the fruit true children will bear if God’s gracious love is manifested in us. Just as Jesus lived the most selfless life, we should do the same.

Given the manifestation of God’s love for us and the regeneration of our hearts, John gives both a word of exhortation and encouragement in the four verses starting from 19. As my brother Handa elaborated in yesterday’s devo on verse 19 and 20, even with a solemn brokenness over our sins, we do not need to fear as “God is greater than our heart.” It is by his power and his strength that even when “our heart condemns us,” we can find peace in knowing God’s provision for his children. 

Getting to John’s encouragement starting from verse 21, we now see the benefits of being a true child of God. To clarify, when John says “if our heart does not condemn us,” he does not mean our heart not condemning us equates to being sinless. As fallen creatures, it is inevitable that we will still succumb to sin even after being regenerated in Christ. This encouragement is specifically for the plausible instance when we uphold righteousness as a result of Christ in us even though we are sinful creatures. So in this case John means a regenerated heart which sincerely acknowledges our situation not a degenerate heart which is ignorant to the truth and engulfed in pride because the latter will not condemn us regardless. Now given the circumstances that our regenerated heart does not condemn us, “we have confidence before God.” 

To further understand this confidence, let us look at verse 22, “and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him.” The encouragement John provides for Christians with a regenerated heart is pretty amazing. John asserts that we can have confidence in asking God for things. However, this is where it gets sticky and dangerous if taken out of context. 

Many may say that the verse clearly says “whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him ” so regardless, it should mean that if I keep his commandments and please him, asking for whatever I want whether it is a nice car or a big house should always be answered. Which I respond with a warning that you are practicing very dangerous eisegesis. First and foremost, John is not giving a good faith leads to answered prayers message. Hence we cannot draw the conclusion that obedience will cause or directly lead to God answering whatever we ask of him. This is why John constantly emphasizes conforming to the image of Christ and always checking ourselves to see if we truly walk in light or in darkness. It is through this detail we can understand the bigger picture. 

If we walk in the light and conform to the image of Christ, His desires naturally become our desires and His will coincides with our will. This is why John states that “whatever we ask we receive from him” because with a heart that yearns to be like Christ, what we ask of him will be answered since it is what God wants. Keeping his commandments and doing what pleases Him isn’t something that leads to answered prayers but rather a natural result of our faith if we have been regenerated in him. Let us make sure that our heart is not set on our own desires but rather God’s.

Consider

1. Have you ever felt overwhelmed by sin in your life?
2. In what ways does the assurance of God being a comforting and supporting father for his children impact your life and actions?
