1 John 3:9-10: Born to Be Righteous

June 11, 2020

9 No one born of God makes a practice of sinning, for God's seed abides in him; and he cannot keep on sinning, because he has been born of God. 10 By this it is evident who are the children of God, and who are the children of the devil: whoever does not practice righteousness is not of God, nor is the one who does not love his brother.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Today’s passage reads very simply, and it is very clear. We are known by our fruit. 

 

Christianity is not a skill to be learned or a switch that we flip on when we are at church or with other Christians. It is a change in our nature, the essence of who we are. As 2 Corinthians 5:17 says, anyone who is in Christ is a “new creation”.  

 

That is what John is talking about here when he says that believers are “born of God” and that His seed abides in us. We are no longer “children of the devil” who only knew sin and were in love with it. Rather, our entire being is changed to love God and serve Him rather than to “keep on sinning” (verse 9). And as God’s seed abides in us, we grow in our love and service to Him, and we grow in our hatred and contempt for the sin that we once loved. 

 

Brothers and sisters, let this not simply be rhetoric that we read and understand in our minds but has no impact on our hearts and our lives. Rather, let us carefully examine our lives and be very honest with ourselves and before God. We either “practice righteousness” and “love [our] brothers” (verse 10) or we do not. Likewise, we are either “children of God” or “children of the devil.” 

 

What does this mean for us? For true believers that are slipping away from the pursuit of God, let this passage serve as a sober reminder that we are not to love “in word or talk but in deed and in truth” (1 John 3:18). Furthermore, when we are tempted, let us cling to this passage to stand firm and declare that we are no longer children of the devil who go about sinning, but we are children of God that “practice righteousness” instead. 

 

For those that read this passage and realize that they do not have a true knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ because of the fruit they bear, stop wearying in the guilt and vanity of sin, and instead come before the Lord this morning in surrender. For his yoke is easy, and his burden is light (Matthew 11:30).

 

Consider


1. Has there been a change in your desires, actions, and thoughts since you have professed to know Christ? 

2. Do you practice righteousness and love your brother? 