1 John 5:20-21: Summary and Conclusion
June 30, 2020

20 And we know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know him who is true; and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life. 21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



As John closes up the letter, he focuses once again on the work of Jesus Christ and His making available the truth that we as Christians know today.

In this letter, John has battled the Gnostics and their insistence upon the need for a “special knowledge”. He concludes it here with his statement that Jesus “has given us understanding” (verse 20). We already know what is true, not because of the reception of a foreign knowledge that has been delivered to us apart from Christ, but because of Jesus’s work on the cross that revealed the fullest extent of God’s glory.

In this letter, John has also battled the false believers who did not live as those who were truly of the Way. He concludes it here with his declaration that those who know Him who is true are also in Him. Those who live as if they do not have Christ in them and are not in Christ themselves do not belong to the Church and do not have eternal life.

We see that verse 20 is essentially a statement that addresses his aforementioned concerns in the Church with the chief solution of Jesus Christ, the Son of God who is “the true God and eternal life” (verse 20).

From this, we arrive at the last verse of the letter: “Little children, keep yourselves from idols”. It seems to be a command that came out of nowhere, and it seems to be a rather peculiar method of ending the letter. However, if we have read the letter thoroughly, it is also a rather fitting summary of the entire letter as well. 

You see, in his entire letter, John attacked many false ideologies and delinquencies of the Church in failing to live as Christ did. He defended the faith against the intruding enemy that sought to pollute the living waters with doctrines that appealed to the sensibilities of man rather than glorify the God Almighty. And we know that another name for those items and philosophies of the world that entertain the man rather than God is “idol”.

John, when he fights against the heresies and the Church’s lackadaisical attitudes of the time, is not just a tired old man responding to the changing times of the generation with a paranoid eye against the world. No, he is looking at the Church that he suffered so much for and loves so much being bombarded by the ideologies of man that set up man as gods. He is heart-clenchingly writing about the dangers and pitfalls a Christian ought not to behold. He knows that every heresy, every unloving actions of the brothers, and every social movement is but an idol that man creates to elevate the self above God, and John is writing to his “little children” in hopes that they would grow up and recognize the error of their ways.

John, nearing the end of his life, is writing a letter that speaks clearly of his desire for the Church to flourish without falling to the attacks of the antichrists. John is not being abrupt or brash in his ending the letter with a command. No, he is being urgent in demonstrating his unending, continued love for the Church and desire for the Church to worship Christ of verse 20 and not the idols of their own hearts. Verse 21 seems like an unsatisfying ending to the letter because though the letter has come to an end, John’s heart for the Church and his concern for their misdeeds have not ended.

This is the old man John who is, at the time of writing the letter, perhaps the only apostle left. He is concerned for the Church because he knows that even one step off of the right path that is Christ leads to death, and he is the only one left who was among the twelve. John is writing this letter that they may have eternal life (verse 13) — this world is not the end and he wants his little children to know that.

Do we feel this way about the Church? Do you feel broken when the Church chases after the things of this world— replacing Christ with ideologies that are contrary to the Gospel? John did, and we ought to as well.

We live in an age when it is sometimes hard even to distinguish the right from the wrong. We have grown up in a culture that celebrates sin. Looking at the churches that have fallen to the world, let us mourn and lament like we have never done before. This is a cause for lament.


Consider

1. Do you yearn for the righteousness of Christ to be shown in the Church? Not a righteousness that we desire, but God desires?