1 John 4:11-12: God Seen Through Us

June 21, 2020


11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. 12 No one has ever seen God; if we love one another, God abides in us and his love is perfected in us.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Once again, John returns to love.


John wants to emphasize, again, the importance of our need to show the love that exists in us. He explains that “if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another” (verse 11)— in this verse, he presents it as an imperative, as a normative command that a Christian ought to perform. Then, in the next verse, he presents the love shown in us as the sign that “God abides in us and his love is perfected in us.” (verse 12).


What this means is that there is both a work and a regenerative aspect to our being able to love our brothers and sisters in Christ.


The first verse explains the “work” aspect of the love existent in Christian community. It is “work” not in the sense that it is something that we have to do unwillingly or for the sake of receiving the award or reward of justification and salvation, but it is a work that requires the human resolve and active participation in sanctification to pursue God’s kingdom in the community of believers. It is a work of obedience that we are able to do for God’s kingdom.


The immediate response to this call for obedience could be, “if love is work, then it is not genuine — loving others must be out of an emotional outpouring.” Of course, if we believe this, we would be merely slaves to our emotions. And I do believe that we once were, however, for the Christians, those who have been freed from ourselves to be once again put under the servanthood of Christ, we have the freedom also from the bondage of acting like how we feel at a given moment. Even when we at moments do not feel like doing something, we can still choose to look to the hope of Jesus and march on in obedience through faith.


Jesus, yes, even Jesus, is seen in the Garden of Gethsemane to be struggling with His human will. This is not to say that His two wills were ever against each other, but He was tempted as we were tempted to go against God’s will and to fall to how humans feel. Jesus never fell, and we also ought never fall. We ought to love when we do not want to— by looking to the Christ who loved even sinners who rebelled against Him to the point of nailing Him to the cross.


The second of today’s verses illustrates the regenerative nature of our ability to love. We briefly touched on this above, but we were once slaves to our beings and the sin within, and could not but obey the master that is the desires of the flesh. We have since been rescued and we have been regenerated, that is, brought to life, to an ability to love once again.


You see, love, as are all good things, is not natural to man. Love is not understood by the sinful mankind and hence, though the world knows it to be something good, they cannot define what it is to look like or even feel like. They know that it has something to do with caring for and giving to an individual other than the self, but it seems to often elevate the other person as an idol, or the feelings above God. The world substitutes proper Biblical love with the exaltation of the emotion of feeling good when being with some other person, or as the excessive desires for an individual, but we understand Biblical love to be somewhat different. Biblical love is a reflection of God’s love that we ought to show in our lives. Biblical love is a response to the love that was shown to us on the cross. We, as those who had once lost even the desire to truly love, have received the ability to love in a way that the world without God could never know. The Christians are the only people who know to love correctly.


This does not mean that all facsimiles of love in the world are false. However, we have to remember that they are but facsimiles— just imitations of the real thing. There are acts of sacrificial love exercised by our friends and family that show us the reality of God’s love for us. These are glimpses of good things that sinful people do by the mercies of God to give the fallen world a glimpse into the vastness of His love. However, of course, the world, when enlightened by such beauties, would rather worship the gift rather than the giver, and often corrupt the gift given by God.


Christians ought not to do so. We ought to love because He first loved us. We ought to love because we are loving the Body of the Christ who loves us. We ought to love because we have been changed fundamentally to cannot but love our brothers and sisters in the faith. Though no one has seen God, by the power of God working through our love, He is seen through the Body reaching its hands out to the world.


Consider


1. Have we bought into the merely sensual love of the world that lacks Christ in the middle?

2. How can we love even when our hearts deceive us? And how can we focus on God when emotions abound?

3. How can we make sure that the amazing gift of emotions in love is glorifying to God as it was originally made to be?