1 John 4:7-10: God is Love

June 20, 2020

7 Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God, and whoever loves has been born of God and knows God. 8 Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love. 9 In this the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only Son into the world, so that we might live through him. 10 In this is love, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


What is the most profound experience of love you have ever encountered? As Christians, our answer should be the very Love that God has revealed to us. This Love far eclipses any emotional high the world might label as love. We must not settle for mere affections or attractions because there exists a Love that over time can only grow deeper. Do we truly believe this? Or has our understanding of God’s Love plateaued as if we basically got the gist of it? Brothers and sisters, if it is not strikingly clear that God’s Love far exceeds anything in this world, let us consider what is written in this passage. 


God is Love - More than a physiological experience, Love is an attribute of God’s nature. John writes in verse 7 that “love is from God”. It is not a force that God has mastered, but Love itself is defined by God. Before all matter and time, God existed from everlasting to everlasting as a triune being. God was Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Each Person of God had a Love for each other that was infinite in quantity and perfect in quality. God, in himself, could already experience an intense and intimate fellowship and was by no means bored when He made creation. This is why only the Christian God, who is triune, can possibly be Loving. For how could a unitary God be loving if there was no object to which this love could be expressed? After all, God cannot suddenly one day become a being with Love because God is immutable. The only explanation that makes sense is that Love had always been a part of God, expressed through His trinity. 


God sent his Son - Once we understand just how much love each Person of God had for each other, we see how crazy it is that “God sent his only Son in the world, so that we might live through him” (verse 9). Seeing a loved one be sent off is already tough to bear, even though our love for each other is imperfect. But think about how much harder it was for God, to send the Son that he so delighted in, to take on the nature of a human and be despised, mocked, and tortured to death. Yet God lavished us with his Love, and “[sent] his Son to be the propitiation for our sins” while we were his helpless and embarrassingly arrogant enemy. From the work of the Son and the willingness of Father, God shares His Love with us through the power of the Holy Spirit.


Joined in his Love - By revealing this Love, God also extends it to us. As a result, God not only allows us to “live through Him”, but also brings us into the intimate dance of His trinity. We can never become God, but God has made a way, through the work of Christ, to form such a relationship with us. As we are caught up in this whirlwind of Love, we learn to delight in it so much that it extends out from our soul to others in a supernatural way. This is why John writes in verse 7 that “whoever loves [with the true Love of God] has born of God and knows God”. Afterwards, John writes in verse 8, “Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love”. John makes it clear that this Love is so magnificent that it is something you either have tasted and can attest to, or something that you simply have not yet encountered; there is no in between. 


Brothers and sisters, God created us for this very reason, to enjoy Him as He declares who He is and expresses all His glory. By relentlessly seeking after Him, we can better know His Love to better praise His name!


Consider


1. Has your understanding of the Love of God been deepening over time or remaining stagnant?
2. In your life, how does this Love of God compare to the feelings of “love” in this world?