Ezra 9:1-2: Intermarrying with the World

August 23, 2020

1 After these things had been done, the officials approached me and said, “The people of Israel and the priests and the Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands with their abominations, from the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites. 2 For they have taken some of their daughters to be wives for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy race has mixed itself with the peoples of the lands. And in this faithlessness the hand of the officials and chief men has been foremost.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


After Israel was established as a nation and given the Law of God, they were commanded to claim their promised land from the Canaanites. We see how the Lord uses His chosen people for this purpose throughout the conquests in Joshua. The Lord makes it clear in Deuteronomy that these Pagan nations were driven out not because of Israel’s righteousness “but because of the wickedness of these nations” (Duet. 9:5). In this scene, Israel was God’s instrument of justice. While their neighboring nations received justice, Israel received mercy. Israel had kindled God’s wrath many times in the past, yet God still chose Israel to recapture His glory by exterminating powers of defilement and establishing a Holy nation.


These series of conquests often provoke us to think - how could God do such a thing? What we are asking is “how God could do such a bad thing” as we consider the utter annihilation of all these foreigners. What we ought to ask is this: how could God do such a merciful thing? How could our infinite, all-powerful, all-deserving God look upon a sin-infested world and so steadfastly fight for its righteousness? In choosing Israel to be set apart, God brought hope into a hopeless situation. In waging Holy wars against these idolatrous nations, God was creating the possibility of light in a world of darkness.


So for the purpose of restoring humanity, it was God’s ordained plan to take the initiative to establish a Holy nation. And in order for this nation to remain in righteousness, God made a crystal clear mandate: “you shall not intermarry with them, giving your daughters to their sons or taking their daughters for your sons, for they would turn away your sons from following me, to serve other gods” (Deut. 7:3-4). 


What we find, however, is that the exiles from today’s passage did not heed to this stern warning. In verse 1, Ezra is approached by officials who tell him “The people of Israel and the priests and the Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands with their abominations, from the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.” Without a doubt, Ezra knew that this was both an abomination to the Lord and a major hindrance for Israel to function as a Holy nation.


Verse 2 tells us that “the holy race has mixed itself with the peoples of the lands”. The very sin that led Israel into exile was still present and Ezra knew that he had to deal with it immediately. The disease of syncretism would spread like wildfire. To the Israelites, this may have seemed harmless since each foreigner who had returned “separated himself from the uncleanness of the peoples of the land to worship the LORD” (Ezra 6:21). Yet this act of intermarriage had sown a deadly seed that would lead to the blending and mixing of cultures, immersing Israel into a worldly sea of unholiness. 


What’s worse was that “in this faithlessness the hand of the officials and chief men has been foremost” (Ezra 9:2). How could Israel have any hope if those responsible for upholding the sanctity of God were those chiefly defiling it? Left unchecked, Israel would return to the times of Ahab and Jezebel, embracing the prophets of Baal while killing the messengers of God.


No, Ezra knew that mixing with these nations was intermarriage with the world. Israel was meant to be a vessel of light from which the world would be blessed. And all throughout its conquest and history, God was faithfully upholding the promise he made to Abraham: “I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing” (Gen. 12:2). The end goal was for this blessing to extend to all the families of this earth (Gen. 12:3). Unless Israel is set apart from marrying the world, the world remains without blessing.


So when God stirs Joshua to claim His land or when God stirs Ezra to drive out the foreigners, He acts not only in the interest of Israel but in the interest of the world as well. Every act of God is in accordance with his perfect Wisdom to bring about the beautiful redemptive history He created for His Glory. It may seem to us that His plan was full of hiccups, but they all serve to show the fallibility of man. Yet God persistently pursues after his covenantal promises, ultimately accomplishing everything through Christ.


Christ became the cornerstone of the Church, the Kingdom that Israel failed to be. Jesus was the victor who clothed us with his righteousness so that we would be set apart in everlasting holiness. And now, as the Church, we are a beacon of blessing to the world because we proclaim the Word of God to the Pagan nations around us. The Church will continue to be a blessing so long as it refuses to marry the world.


Brothers and sisters, we cannot intermarry with the world and by the grace of God, we will not marry with the world. The true Church fights to purge itself of worldliness while clinging on to godliness - are you a part of it?


Consider


1. How can we decrease worldliness in the Church and increase godliness in the world?