Ezra 5:3-5: Relenting from Delay
July 26, 2020

3 At the same time Tattenai the governor of the province Beyond the River and Shethar-bozenai and their associates came to them and spoke to them thus: “Who gave you a decree to build this house and to finish this structure?” 4 They also asked them this:[a] “What are the names of the men who are building this building?” 5 But the eye of their God was on the elders of the Jews, and they did not stop them until the report should reach Darius and then an answer be returned by letter concerning it.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

From the next couple of verses after today’s passage, we know that the men of Israel answer faithfully to the questions of the government officials. From the rest of chapter five, we will see the full dialogue that occurred between the builders and the officials, but today, we see that the passage limits the dialogue to merely the questions asked by inquirers.

Firstly, the beginning of verse three establishes the authority and governmental position of those asking. It shows that these men who came to question the work being done was of a position that could possibly shut down the operation that was resuming in Jerusalem. The threat of yet another pause in the ministry that the Israelites had started shows its face among the Israelites. If these men act against the builders, they could be a far more powerful deterrent against the building of the temple. The previous adversaries had been ordinary men who appealed to the king, but this time, the enemy could be government officials with political sway over the king’s heart.

And then the questions start flying. “Who gave you a decree to build this house and to finish this structure?”, “What are the names of the men who are building this building?”

Imagine that you are on your school campus and you are holding an event for evangelism. Let’s say this is an outreach called “Living Water” where you hand out water bottles and sandwiches to the students coming out of their clubs after a night of drinking and dancing. Suddenly, a student representative or an administrative official from the school comes out to ask you if you: “who gave you the authority to do this outreach?” or “what are the names of the people who are doing this outreach?”. Naturally, we would be careful and be cautious as to how we are to proceed our actions.

I imagine the same would have been the case for these Israelites. They had been approached by the officials of the most powerful nation in the region. Their answer would determine the fate of their work in building the temple of the Lord. Today, we won’t discuss how these men answered, but we will instead discuss what their general attitude towards this threat was. This, we can see, is covered in the very next verse, verse five.

It says that “the eye of their God was on the elders of the Jews”. The eye of the God Almighty rested on the workers who built the temple that would be God’s dwelling place among men. This God, who called the Israelites back to the forsaken land of their forefather’s sins, the God who stirred the hearts of the Israelites to cross a barren wilderness to seek David’s city, the God who moved the heart of a foreign king to advocate for the rebuilding of the House of God, was the God who had His very eye on the leaders, the elders, of the Jews.

You see, though these elders feared the governor of the province Beyond the River, the elders feared the Governor of the realm beyond the earth far more. They feared the God who had instituted the very positions of all earthly kings and principalities. None of these men, even this governor who held a direct rule over the continuation of the construction, held a position apart from the sovereignty of God.

The Israelites had come back to their promised land to rebuild the temple, and they were commanded by the most fearful being in the entire universe and beyond it. They were not about to bend and fall at the fearful questions of the officials— they would answer with faith in the Lord Most High.

There is a second implication to the eye of God being on Israel. If this God who was to be feared had His interest in the Israelites and their work, it would also be Him who would allow for the work to flourish or to perish. The Israelites had nothing to fear because of the fact that their interest was in unity with God’s interest. What the future brought in their struggle did not matter in determining their faithfulness now because only God held the future in His hands— not the official, not the king, and not the Israelites.

In fact, as we read in the latter part of verse five, God graciously allows the Israelites to continue their work. The officials, after receiving their answers, do not stop the Israelites from working. Not only had the Israelites no need to fear, but the Israelites had all the reason for confidence. We must understand that when God rescues and consecrates His people, He does not only barely preserve their lives, but secures it within the firm grasp of His eternal power. The Israelites not only had the decree of the King of Kings to uphold, but His assistance and provision as well.

The eye of God is upon us, the Church, now as it was upon the Israelites then. His unmoving gaze upon us is one that makes us to realize the position we hold as subjects to Him, yet also as His beloved children. We have nothing to fear in answering for the Lord because He is the one who is ultimately in control. We also have everything to be joyful in living for the Lord because He is the one who loves us.


Consider

1. Are you practicing the presence of God daily to remember that He has His eye on you?