Ezra 6:12: The Immutable Decree of a King

August 8, 2020

12 May the God who has caused his name to dwell there overthrow any king or people who shall put out a hand to alter this, or to destroy this house of God that is in Jerusalem. I Darius make a decree; let it be done with all diligence.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


We have already seen in past devotionals that God is absolutely sovereign - everything He ordains to pass will indeed come to pass. The Word of God is immutable and scripture makes this clear. As the angel of the church in Philadelphia proclaims, God is the “the holy one, the true one, who has the key of David, who opens and no one will shut, who shuts and no one opens” (Rev. 3:7).


God’s sovereignty should give us much assurance and trust in Him. Let us not be shaken by the secondary decisions of the world, which are completely dependent on the will of God. When we hear about how we must spend another year in quarantine, let us be like Job and proclaim, “I know that you can do all things, and that no purpose of yours can be thwarted” (Job 42:2). Though all of this, “our God is in the heavens; he does all that he pleases” (Ps. 115:3), and we know He works all things for His glory and the good of His people.


Once again, we see in verse 12 a picture of God’s sovereignty. Darius declares, “May the God who has caused his name to dwell there overthrow any king or people who shall put out a hand to alter this, or to destroy this house of God that is in Jerusalem”. No one in Darius’s kingdom can tamper or touch the construction of God’s temple. But brothers and sisters, we serve a God whose Kingdom is far greater than the Persian empire. What can possibly prevent God from building his Church? Be wary of pragmatism! Though worldly circumstances shift, let us ceaselessly serve God, love one another, and witness to the world.


Pay attention to what Darius says at the end of verse 12: “I Darius make a decree; let it be done with all diligence”. When Darius issued a decree, his orders were carried out immediately. If Jesus is our Lord, shall we not also obey his decree with all diligence? Let us not forget that God’s sovereignty does not exclude man’s responsibility. We are held accountable for our actions just as we were accountable to the guilt we deserved from our sin. If God calls us to intercede in prayer, let us be diligent, acting in haste!


Brothers and sisters, let us be prudent. Whether we are at home or on campus, we must diligently use the means of grace God has given us to live in obedience to God’s will. Let us work without worry and not allow worldly things to faze us. Rather, be filled with joy, knowing that God has declared the end from the beginning. What a glorious privilege it is to be etched into God’s immutable plan for eternity!


Consider

1. Do you truly believe in the immutability of God’s Word?

2. How does it affect your attitude toward worldly circumstances and working for the Lord?