Ezra 7:25-26: Profitable for Teaching and Reproof

August 16, 2020

25 “And you, Ezra, according to the wisdom of your God that is in your hand, appoint magistrates and judges who may judge all the people in the province Beyond the River, all such as know the laws of your God. And those who do not know them, you shall teach. 26 Whoever will not obey the law of your God and the law of the king, let judgment be strictly executed on him, whether for death or for banishment or for confiscation of his goods or for imprisonment.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today we read about how Artaxerxes allows Ezra to appoint magistrates and judges who can properly uphold the Law of God. We see how even this pagan king recognizes that proper worship is impossible unless the law is taught and enforced amongst the people. For Christians, we must likewise recognize that a Church cannot function unless its leaders know and enforce Scripture, which is the very Word of God.


Today’s passage is the last portion of the letter Artaxerxes writes to Ezra, whom he gives the authority to reestablish the Mosaic law in Israel. In verse 25, Artaxerxes tells Ezra to “appoint magistrates and judges who may judge all the people in the province Beyond the River”, and he is to do it “according to the wisdom of your God that is in your hand”. Since we know that Ezra is a scribe, we can infer that the wisdom of God in his hand is the Law of the Lord. 


It may very well be that wisdom is something these Israelites lacked. Without a proper foundation of the Law, they could neither function as a civil society or live in communion with God. Simply put, God’s people walk in foolishness if they do not know God’s Word. Artaxerxes may have received complaints from the returnees about how the appointed judges in the area Beyond the River had no idea how to properly judge important matters. If the existing authorities did not understand what was clean or unclean, or what sacrifices of atonement were required, how would God’s people be set apart? How would a holy God possibly commune with a defiled and idolatrous nation?


This is why it was necessary to send Ezra to establish a new group of judges who would be able to uphold the Law of God. If anyone did not know the Law, verse 25 says that it was Ezra’s duty to teach them. It is not enough to just throw these judges a copy of the Law of God like a piece of logistical documentation. The Word of God is precious and cannot be simply skimmed over. It must be learned and taught, through the power of the Holy Spirit. 


Remember, Paul prays that the Church at Ephesus may have the “Spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him” (Eph. 1:17). Paul also writes in Romans 12 that teaching is a spiritual gift - God has appointed in the Church “first apostles, second prophets, third teachers” (1 Cor. 12:28). God has ordained people - whether they be Ezra, Moses, Levitical priests, pastors, fathers, mothers, or fellow believers - for the purpose of teaching in their specific contexts. Let us hold fast to His established order and ensure that His Word is taught without compromise.


Artaxerxes, as a king, understood the importance of having certain people with the authority to judge, rule, and teach. In verse 26, Artaxerxes imparts to Ezra the authority to execute judgement on his people, “whether for death or for banishment or for confiscation of his goods or for imprisonment”. These punishments were to be executed in accordance with both “law of your God and the law of the king”. Ezra was still required to follow the Persain laws set by Artaxerxes, but he understood that even Artaxerxes was under the authority of a sovereign God. In fact, the actual execution of these punishments were likely carried out by the Persian authorities. Here, we see that the Word of God is backed by a powerful authority - the great Persian empire - whose power was formidable. But this picture is only a glimpse of the power of God, who does as He pleases, and only as He pleases.


Even Artaxerxes understood that he was not above the Word of God. Thus, he obediently declares in verse 23, “whatever is decreed by the God of heaven, let it be done in full”. To make sure that God’s Word would be diligently understood and obeyed, he appointed Ezra to establish an orderly system of Godly teaching, administration, and punishment. 


We hope and pray that your Church also has such a high view of Scripture - the Word of God must be diligently taught, administered, and obeyed. 


Consider


1. What role does Scripture play in your Church?

2. What role does Scripture play in your relationship with fellow believers?