Ezra 3:8-9: Orderly Work
July 17, 2020

8 Now in the second year after their coming to the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak made a beginning, together with the rest of their kinsmen, the priests and the Levites and all who had come to Jerusalem from the captivity. They appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to supervise the work of the house of the Lord. 9 And Jeshua with his sons and his brothers, and Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, together supervised the workmen in the house of God, along with the sons of Henadad and the Levites, their sons and brothers.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

After the altar had been completed, the people of Israel officially began to rebuild the house of God. This happened in the second month of the second year of their return. We see in verse 8 that Zerubbabel and another man named Jeshua took the initiative to oversee this process. They formed an orderly system where certain Levites were appointed to “supervise the work of the house of the Lord”. Not only did God give the Israelites the means to return home and the materials needed to build the temple, but even in the process of rebuilding, His sovereign hand was guiding His people through the process. Because God had stirred up his people, they were able to work harmoniously and efficiently as their eyes were unified under the singular goal of glorifying the Lord.

At first glance, it may not seem like much is happening in these two verses. However, we must not forget that these exiles were rabble - a disorderly crowd. Even by modern standards, building a temple is an endeavor that takes professionals much time and effort to plan. Imagine how difficult it would be for your local congregation to gather together and build a new church plant. These Israelites were not nearly as educated or technologically equipped as we are today - after all, they had just returned from 70 years of captivity! Rebuilding the temple must have taken a lot of faith. Most of these people had not even seen the temple before, and those who had seen it were too old to work. This passage clearly highlights the orderliness of God working through man.

God calls order out of chaos all throughout the Bible. We see this happen during the process of creation. From a dark, formless void, God speaks His divine imperative and fills the world with his good order. Our ability to breathe and enjoy creation testifies to the sheer wisdom of God and His orderly creation. 

God calls order out of chaos not just in the physical realm but in the spiritual realm as well. Though our world was infested by sin and though we, by our very nature, were darkened and disorderly, God redeemed and restored us through Christ, the Light of the world. Let us not forget how crazy it is that God brought us into good order even though we were so fallen! The passage we read today points to this greater act of divine restoration. 

Brothers and sisters, though the victory has been won, we still await a day where complete order will be restored in a new Heavens and a new Earth. Like these Israelites, let us faithfully expand the Kingdom of God and marvel at how we are even able to do so - for it is a miracle that God could use us, a rabble of sinners, to build up his Church. 

Consider

1. Do you ever wonder how God could possibly use you for his purpose? Have faith! Remember that God used a disorderly crowd of exiles for His Glory. 
2. In what ways is God an orderly God? How has He turned chaos into order in your life? 