Ezra 1:6-11: Provided to Serve
July 4, 2020

6 And all who were about them aided them with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, with beasts, and with costly wares, besides all that was freely offered. 7 Cyrus the king also brought out the vessels of the house of the Lord that Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem and placed in the house of his gods. 8 Cyrus king of Persia brought these out in the charge of Mithredath the treasurer, who counted them out to Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah. 9 And this was the number of them: 30 basins of gold, 1,000 basins of silver, 29 censers, 10 30 bowls of gold, 410 bowls of silver, and 1,000 other vessels; 11 all the vessels of gold and of silver were 5,400. All these did Sheshbazzar bring up, when the exiles were brought up from Babylonia to Jerusalem.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


It was certainly great news when God convicted Cyrus to allow His people to return. It was even greater news when God convicted a group of men to boldly take initiative and embark on a dangerous journey to rebuild His temple. However, many practical challenges remained. Building the temple required many resources that the captives simply did not have. Where would they possibly get all the gold and silver they needed?

We see in verse 6 that though the Jews had nothing, their hunger for God’s kingdom was sufficient for God to provide them with the resources they needed. Commanded by the king, the people around helped these exiles and “aided them with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, with beasts, and with costly wares”. On top of that, verse 7 says that Cyrus himself brought out the vessels that Nebuchadnezzar had seized. It was already unbelievable that Cyrus would let the captives go, but he did more than that - God stirred Cyrus to provide the necessary materials as well! 

As a result, we see in verses 9-10 all that God had faithfully provided. In total, the vessels of gold and silver were 5,400. However, among these materials, the altar of incense, the bronze altar, and the ark of the covenant were missing. God had taken away these things from the Jews, preventing them from worshipping, because they did not have the correct heart. What mattered most were not these physical components. They were merely meant to symbolize a proper heart, so God removed these things to cleanse the Jews of their false worship. In rebuilding the temple, the Jews received another chance. But later on in Malachi, we see that the temple eventually is filled with polluted offerings once again (Mal. 1).

But for now, Ezra introduces Sheshbazzar under the hopes that he will take charge to rebuild the temple and restore true worship. Verse 8 says this great number of gold and silver was counted out to “Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah”. The Bible isn’t clear on this, but many theologians believe that Sheshbazzar is the same as Zerubbabel, the leader of these exiles, whom we will read more about in later chapters. He is referred to by his Babylonian name, Sheshbazzar, while he was still in Babylon in chapter 1, but is later referred to by his Jewish name after he leaves Babylon in the rest of the chapters. God uses Zerubbabel to bring new hope in restoring His Kingdom, but it ultimately does not succeed. However, this picture of Zerubbabel foreshadows something greater. Through the line of Zerubbabel comes Christ (Matt. 1:12), our eternal hope who builds the everlasting Church, allowing us to worship in spirit and truth.

Brothers and sisters, let us remember that we are led by Christ, who is far greater than Zerubbabel. Christ promised that he will build his Church and in it, every tribe, tongue, people and nation will one day be gathered (Rev. 7:9). Just like the captives in Babylon, we might gasp and ask how is this possible? Every nation? What do we have to accomplish such a feat? Yet Ezra shows us that the same sovereign God who provided His people with materials to rebuild his temple will provide us with the power to build his Church. 

All we need to do is seek after His Glory. Let us remember the advice of Hudson Taylor: “God’s work done in God’s way will not lack God’s means of support.”

Consider

1. How has God provided for you and what have you done with these gifts? 
2. Are we truly striving to do things “God’s way” and for the sake of His Kingdom?