Ezra 8:15-20: Priestly Guardians

August 21, 2020


24 Then I set apart twelve of the leading priests: Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their kinsmen with them. 25 And I weighed out to them the silver and the gold and the vessels, the offering for the house of our God that the king and his counselors and his lords and all Israel there present had offered. 26 I weighed out into their hand 650 talents of silver, and silver vessels worth 200 talents, and 100 talents of gold, 27 20 bowls of gold worth 1,000 darics, and two vessels of fine bright bronze as precious as gold. 28 And I said to them, “You are holy to the Lord, and the vessels are holy, and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering to the Lord, the God of your fathers. 29 Guard them and keep them until you weigh them before the chief priests and the Levites and the heads of fathers' houses in Israel at Jerusalem, within the chambers of the house of the Lord.” 30 So the priests and the Levites took over the weight of the silver and the gold and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem, to the house of our God.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we see that the valuables given to the Israelites are divided among the priests. They are to guard this great sum of wealth until they reach the temple, where it will be used as an offering to the Lord. 


Of course, this was a very risky assignment. For the priests to carry this much wealth would make them easy targets to robbers and thieves along the way. And we saw in yesterday’s devotional how the Israelites did not have a royal escort back to their homeland, but rather they were trusting in God alone for their protection during their journey. 


Thus, the priests were at least to some extent showing their faith in the Lord. They would be the most likely victims of robbery due to the great wealth they were transporting, but they still trusted in the Lord for their protection and returned to Jerusalem in obedience. Obviously, this is a trust in the Lord that we can all learn from.


However, there is also another thing to be learned from this passage: guarding the wealth that has been given to us for the Lord. As we saw in the devotional from two days ago, we as believers are all now a royal priesthood. Furthermore, we as believers are all given an inheritance through Christ Jesus (Ephesians 1:11), worth far more than any sum of wealth that this world could offer. 


In other words, we are the priests of the Lord that must guard the treasure that He has given to us: our salvation. The Bible itself says that we must “work out [our] own salvation with fear and trembling” (Philippians 2:12) and that we must “guard our hearts with all vigilance” (Proverbs 4:23). 


What then must we guard this treasure from?  


Brothers and sisters, the moment that we confessed Jesus Christ as our Savior and Lord, the devil and all the powers of darkness waged war against us. Far more dangerous than any robber or thief along a trail, Satan himself has made it his goal to turn our hearts away from the Lord and strip us of what He has given to us. When we sin, he floods us with guilt and shame so that we run from the Lord, doubting our own salvation. 


Not only that, but those who are given this treasure will be persecuted, as promised by the Word of God itself (2 Timothy 3:12). The world will hate those that are in Christ Jesus because it hated Him first (John 15:19). 


We must therefore guard our hearts from all these things. 


However, brothers and sisters, we can fully trust in our God for protection, just as the priests did in this passage. The Word of God promises that for believers, there is nothing that can separate us from His love (Romans 8:38-39). There is no person, no temptation, no scheme of the devil that can even come close to robbing us of the wealth that the Lord has given us. For it is not us that is guarding this treasure, but it is the God of the cosmos that is doing so, even at this very moment.


Therefore, brothers and sisters, let us take heart. Let us trust in the Lord to finish what He has completed in us, and to guard our hearts to the very end. And when we finally arrive at home with the Lord, let us present the offering for the Lord that we have carefully guarded our entire lives. That is, let us present ourselves to the Lord, for we are His portion through Christ Jesus (Deuteronomy 32:9). 


Let us then carefully watch how we live our lives, even today. For we are not our own, but we are an offering to the Lord. 




Consider


1. Are you guarding your heart and living your life as an offering to the King?