Ezra 7:7-10: A Heart to Study the Law

August 12, 2020


7 And there went up also to Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king, some of the people of Israel, and some of the priests and Levites, the singers and gatekeepers, and the temple servants. 8 And Ezra[a] came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the king. 9 For on the first day of the first month he began to go up from Babylonia, and on the first day of the fifth month he came to Jerusalem, for the good hand of his God was on him. 10 For Ezra had set his heart to study the Law of the Lord, and to do it and to teach his statutes and rules in Israel.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In Persia, the emperor was considered to be at a level of deity, and that meant that even to approach him was an intense task. Yet, somehow, Ezra was commissioned to the work, and was able to receive all that he asked for from the king of Persia, Artaxerxes. Considering that he had an audience with the king of Persia, Artaxerxes, Ezra was most likely of a prominent status, or at least of good connections within Babylonia. Yes, of course, ultimately, it was because the “hand of the LORD” was upon Ezra that all this was possible, but it is likely that Ezra had also received much physical blessings from the LORD as well.


This shows that as Ezra was likely rich, he also had a lot to lose. Yet, from our passage, we see that Ezra gathered the people of Israel and made a trek to Israel from Babylonia. You see, though Ezra had lived in Babylonia for a long time, if not for his entire life, and though he most likely had a plentiful life in Babylonia, he was willing to leave it all behind to go to Jerusalem.


As we read in our passage today, the trek was a four month journey. They had traveled from the first day of the first month to the first day of the fifth month. To go from Babylonia to Jerusalem, Ezra did not have the modern highway system or lodging. His journey was heavily susceptible to robbers and thieves. It may even have been possible that some who joined him on the journey could have abandoned, or worse, robbed him.


Yet, Ezra took the journey. He traveled through hardship to arrive at the promised land, the City of David, Jerusalem.


Why? Why did Ezra take such a journey to Jerusalem? Why would he leave behind the good things to seek an old city that had been destroyed from its former glory?


Well, as we know, for all the Israelites, it was for the glory of God. It was because the Israelites were moved to want to glorify God and to bring the mercy of God upon Israel once again. This goal of wanting to glorify God is the goal that us Christians share even today. Though we may not need to go to Jerusalem, we travel towards God in our sanctification and worship.


However, let us delve a bit deeper. What was the exact reason why Ezra wanted to go to Jerusalem? Yes, it was to worship of course, but what was his specific personal calling? Zerubabbel had been called to build the temple. God had put in Zerubabbel’s heart the desire to build the house of God where the Israelites could offer sacrifices once again. What had God put in Ezra’s heart?


In our passage today, verse 10 reveals this quite clearly for us. God “had set his heart to study the Law of the LORD”. God put into the heart of Ezra the need to study the Word of God. Ezra, like the priests before him, knew of the importance of the Scriptures and sought to go to Jerusalem to study it. For Ezra, all the toil, sweat, and dangers of the journey were to be considered naught in the light of the Law of God.


Yet, one may wonder: “why would he need to go to Jerusalem to study the Law?”. The next part of verse 10 answers this for us: “and to do it and to teach his statutes and rules in Israel.”. Certainly, Ezra could have studied the Law at a comfortable desk in Babylonia. The Israelites would have most likely taken scrolls of the Scriptures to Babylonia with them. However, Ezra wanted to do it and teach it. That is to say, the Word of God is not something that can merely be studied as a literary piece of work, but it is something to be done as it instructs man to live a life glorifying to God. Furthermore, it is something to be taught as it is something done not only by the self, but by the community that exhorts one another through the teaching of the Word.


To study the Law naturally requires doing the Law, and sharing the teachings with the fellow brothers and sisters of the holy community. Ezra could only do that when he joined the ever-increasing community of Israel reforming in Jerusalem.


All are called to study the Word, but some, like Ezra are specially called to the career of studying and preaching the Word. For these people, it is not merely enough to study the Word apart from works and teaching. They must do the Law they study and freely share it.


Consider


1. Do you study the Word daily?

2. Have you ever considered the cost of studying the Word?