Ezra 6:5: Restored Riches in the Temple

August 4, 2020

5 And also let the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that is in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon, be restored and brought back to the temple that is in Jerusalem, each to its place. You shall put them in the house of God.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



In today’s verse, we see another rather significant detail regarding the decree by Cyrus approving the rebuilding of the temple.



While the verse at first appears rather straightforward, with further speculation we see that these precious goods were actually from the original temple built long before: “which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that is in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon.” This means that the goods from the temple built by Solomon were actually preserved and now decreed to be returned to the new temple in Jerusalem.



First we should remember the context in order to realize the astounding significance behind this verse. Upon the destruction of the Solomonic temple and being taken into exile by King Nebuchadnezzar, the Israelites felt as if God had forsaken them and hence were hopeless, not even being able to imagine being restored. Furthermore, the restoration of their precious goods may have probably been a secondary or tertiary problem to more concerning issues such as the destruction of the temple and being in exile.



Keeping this in mind, let us now recall an important detail brother Sam elaborated in his devotional last Thursday, “God gave the land of Judah into the hands of Babylon, but this was not God angrily giving up on His people and throwing them away. Rather, he was disciplining the remnant of His people, that they would be refined.”



It is vital that we understand that what happened was most certainly not out of God’s control. The deliverance of the people of Judah into the hands of Babylon served a crucial purpose: to prune and discipline His people. While the people of Judah faced hardship in the moment, through this trial they turned back to God.



This complete restoration of the precious goods further shows how God did not forget his people and how He perfectly and meticulously planned out the process. God could have easily and would’ve been justified in killing those who were disobedient but rather mercifully delivered His people into the hands of the enemy in order to discipline them for future restoration, which would include the gold and silver vessels from the Solomonic temple.



In hindsight the preservation and restoration of the precious goods to the new temple actually further magnifies God’s love for his people and wisdom in His sovereignty. As always is the case, God kept his promise with His people and we see it clearly through the restoration of the temple.



It is so easy as spontaneous creatures to lose hope or falter in our trust in God when unexpected and seemingly adverse events happen to us, but the people of Judah should act as an example to us. While not all difficult circumstances will equate to God’s judgement on us, He still ordains every single detail in our life. 



Whether it be following the example of Job who even as an upright man of God persevered through hardship, trusting God or the people of Judah who forsook God but through their hardship put their trust back in Him, let us turn our faces towards our Father in heaven who cares for His children, bringing restoration just as we saw with the people of Judah.



Consider

1. What are some past blessings in your life?
2. Have you considered God’s role in these blessings?