Ezra 7:27-28: Blessed Be the Lord

August 17, 2020

27 Blessed be the Lord, the God of our fathers, who put such a thing as this into the heart of the king, to beautify the house of the Lord that is in Jerusalem, 28 and who extended to me his steadfast love before the king and his counselors, and before all the king's mighty officers. I took courage, for the hand of the Lord my God was on me, and I gathered leading men from Israel to go up with me.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


After receiving the letter from Artaxerxes, which we have read in the past week, Ezra breaks out in praise. In verse 27, Ezra begins by proclaiming, “Blessed be the Lord”! 


What does it mean to bless the Lord? We see this phrase often in the Psalms. In Hebrew, to bless the Lord is simply to praise and worship Him. It is not like God would gain something that he does not already have through our blessing. We do not bless God the same way God blesses us. While God’s blessings are wholly undeserved, the blessings that we offer to God are wholly deserved. Blessing the Lord is something that must be done because He is worthy of all the praise and honor and glory.


We see in verse 27 that Ezra’s words of praise come immediately after hearing about how the house of the Lord will be beautified. This is a mark of a true believer. Ezra’s joy is not derived from his own circumstances, but rather by the circumstances surrounding God’s kingdom. In reality, Ezra’s circumstance did not improve much. He was probably already in a high position and respected by the king. By worldly standards, Ezra's situation had worsened; it required Ezra to forsake his wealth and relocate from his comfortable life in Babylon. 


Imagine after spending years advancing through a well-paying company, God suddenly closes all doors and calls you to another nation to be a Gospel witness. Would you begrudgingly submit to His will or will you see it as the amazing God-glorifying opportunity that it is? For Ezra, who’s heart was set on God and His Word, this news caused him to break forth in spontaneous worship - Blessed be the Lord, the God of our fathers, who put such a thing as this into the heart of the king!


If our hearts are truly set on God's will, our lips will bless the Lord when we can decrease for the sake of His increase. We bless Him knowing that our ability to give up our own kingdom is not from us but rather from the power of the Holy Spirit. And this is encouraging because it means that the hand of the Lord is upon us. This shows that the only way that our carnal hearts can bless the Lord is if God blesses us first through the work of the Holy Spirit. Thus, the fact that our hearts can sing “blessed be the Lord” is itself a blessing from God as well!


In verse 28, Ezra gives a short testimony about how he was blessed by the Lord. He doesn’t boast about how he devoted himself to studying God’s word or how he courageously gathered the leading men from Israel to go with him; rather, Ezra gives all the credit to the Lord. Ezra acknowledges that God set up the situation, extending to him “steadfast love before the king and his counselors, and before all the king's mighty officers”. But it wasn’t just that God set up the situation and Ezra did the rest. Ezra also acknowledges that “the hand of the Lord my God was on me”; in other words, Ezra was only able to do anything good because God’s blessing was upon him.


This is why Ezra would sing “blessed be the Lord”, for he knew just how blessed he was in order to accomplish what he did. Ezra knew that there was nothing special about him that deserved such a blessing. In fact, he was a broken vessel like the rest of mankind. Yet nonetheless, he was able to take courage and serve God’s kingdom only because God called him, a broken vessel, to be an instrument for His glory.


If ever we find ourselves full of zeal for the Lord, remember that it is because He is working through us and bestowing us with great blessings. And when we realize how crazy it is that God would choose to bless us, it should stir us to good works and quicken our souls to bless his name in response. For every deep conviction, for every leap of faith, and for every step in sanctification, let us be thankful that God has filled our journey home with billions of blessings. 

 

We are praying for you and hoping that today your heart will bless the Lord, because in Christ, He has already blessed you with every spiritual blessing!


Consider


1. How has God blessed you?

2. How have you blessed him in return?