Ezra: Introduction
June 30, 2020

Today, we will be starting a new book of the Bible: Ezra. Previously, we saw both the wrath and love of God for Israel in Malachi along with the signs and result of God’s love being manifested within us in 1 John. Now in Ezra, we will encounter the topic of being faithful to the Lord and his law in all that we do.

To further understand this book, we must first grasp the general context. Decades prior, the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem and its temple, leading to the Israelites being taken into exile by King Nebuchadnezzar in 586 BC. In 539, King Cyrus of Persia overthrew the Babylonian king and allowed the Jewish exiles to return to their home. Ezra now picks up at the time when some Israelites return to Jerusalem in preparation for rebuilding the city.

Chapters 1 through 6 discuss the rebuilding of the temple prior to Ezra while chapters 7 to 10 elaborate on Ezra’s arrival more than half a century later in 458 BC. In chapter 3, we see the rebuilding of the temple and completion of the very simple foundation. Now in verse 11 and 12 we see different responses to this hopeful action which gives light into the dynamic present between the Israelites. While many sang and praised the Lord giving thanks, many of the priests and Levites wept. The younger generation of Israelites were extremely thrilled to be out of captivity and to help in this project to restore their nation but the elders which consisted of the priests and Levites, responded differently because they still had a vivid memory of the splendor of the temple that was built by Solomon. While it was still exciting and great that this temple was being built, it could not compare to the splendor and glory of the Solomonic temple that was built during the golden age of Israel so to them it was a bittersweet moment. Later in chapter 6, we see the completion of the temple and the celebration for it.

Now upon his arrival in chapter 7, Ezra immediately institutes significant reforms among the people because they were still practicing pagan traditions and rituals they learned under captivity and were also married to pagans. As verse 10 notes in chapter 7, “For Ezra had set his heart to study the Law of the Lord, and to do it and to teach his statutes and rules in Israel.” That was the main focus Ezra had: not only to teach the law of the Lord but also to emphasize our need to live it out. Matthew Henry, a 17th century Wales minister, noted regarding God’s will that Ezra “made it his business to inquire into it, searched the scriptures, and sought the knowledge of God, of his mind and will, in the scriptures, which is to be found there, but not without seeking.” This is exactly how we should approach scripture. The Bible is not just a book with some good stories but rather the truth and hence something we should study and apply in our lives. So let us tarry in scripture, diligently looking deeper into why a message or sentence was written there and how it should impact us. Only through this can we be prepared to serve God correctly.


Please take this time to read over the whole of Ezra — it does not have to be examined in detail. Understanding the general structure and theme of the book will help in analyzing it closely.

However, while reading, just highlight interesting notes or questions. Also, if there is a burning question, please email Handa (hchun@princeton.edu), we will make sure to answer it in our devotionals (or if it is really burning, we will answer immediately — let us know). 