Ezra 5:12: Given Over for Rebuke
July 30, 2020

12 But because our fathers had angered the God of heaven, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house and carried away the people to Babylonia.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we see the Israelites acknowledging their sinful past and the rebuke from God that it warranted. They were not overrun by Babylon simply due to differences in military or political strength, but because they had constantly sinned against and angered their God. 

For context, the Israelites were constantly sinning against the Lord by living in rampant idolatry. They adopted the abominations and sinful practices of the surrounding nations, rather than living as the holy, chosen people of God. God had mercifully sent prophet after prophet to proclaim His word and tell His people to return to Him, but they did not listen. The prophets warned that God would rebuke the Israelites if they did not turn from their sin, but they did not care. 

Finally, God gave the land of Judah into the hands of Babylon, but this was not God angrily giving up on His people and throwing them away. Rather, he was disciplining the remnant of His people, that they would be refined. 

In other words, God was using Nebuchadnezzar to discipline His people. It is not that God was simply “making the best out of a bad situation” when the Babylonians overtook the Israelites. Rather, God was fully in control over the situation, and it was God Himself who “gave them into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar” (verse 12) in order to refine His people. 

Brothers and sisters, we may often question why God allows us to experience certain trials, pains, and hardships in our lives. It is true that we live in a fallen world, and much of the pain that we experience is not due to our own sinfulness directly, but because of the brokenness of this world. However, we mustn’t think that God is absent during such trials. Rather, we must trust that through such pain and hardship, God is guiding us and refining us. 

Furthermore, we must have the same attitude towards discipline that the returning exiles had in today’s passage. That is, they acknowledged and accepted the Lord’s discipline. When we are disciplined by the Lord, we mustn’t become angry or bitter with Him. Our main focus should not be to get out of the season of trial and hardship. Rather, when we are disciplined by the Lord, let us submit to Him and ask Him to show us our own sins and trust that He is refining us. 

Therefore, let us take the Lord’s discipline well and daily ask to have our love and devotion to Him refined. Let us ask the Lord to make us more like Jesus Christ, and let us embrace the discipline and refinement that will follow. 


Consider

1. What is your response to the Lord’s discipline? 