Ezra 6:11: What is Deserved of the Lawbreakers

August 7, 2020

11 Also I make a decree that if anyone alters this edict, a beam shall be pulled out of his house, and he shall be impaled on it, and his house shall be made a dunghill.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


King Darius’s new decree pushes the edict of Cyrus even further. What Cyrus proclaimed was already enacted without question - defying his word would surely result in death. But Darius further emphasizes the significance of this decree by describing a gruesome execution that would fall upon anyone that would dare even alter it.


A key theme from Ezra is the sovereignty of God. A Persian king's powerful decree points to the absolute immutable decree of the Word of God. In verse 11, we see a glimpse of what happens when the edict of Darius is broken. As the ruler of an ancient, global superpower, everything within Darius’s vast kingdom was legally under his control. Outside of God’s restraint, king Darius was free to do whatever he saw fit; the life of every subject in his kingdom hung on the verdict of his word. The circumstances were hopeless for anyone who had enmity with the king. 


Consider what is deserved of a lawbreaker: “if anyone alters this edict, a beam shall be pulled out of his house, and he shall be impaled on it, and his house shall be made a dunghill” (verse 11). A person who challenges the law of the king defies the powerful king himself. Darius gives a taste of what his lawbreakers would deserve by enacting this humiliating death sentence. Because these perpetrators, who are mere property of Darius, seek to act against their master, Darius teaches them a lesson by impaling the perpetrators on a beam from their own home so that they as masters are killed by their property. The perpetrator becomes a representation of what happens when one challenges the sovereign and all of his property becomes a detestable pile of stench. 


Now imagine if a worthless lawbreaker was brought before Darius, and even in the presence of the king, he continually curses and spits at the throne in full defiance. The lawbreaker has caused disruption in the kingdom and would even foolishly jest around the king. What if Darius, in fury, declares this lawbreaker to be guilty but then directs the punishment to himself rather than this man? To the surprise of everyone, Darius is impaled to a beam and suffers an excruciating death. Brothers and sisters, would such an act not shock you? Is this not the Gospel?


Let us not forget that we are the guilty lawbreakers. We have transgressed a Sovereign who is far greater than Darius - we rightfully deserved an eternity in hell. Yet our Lord, so rich in mercy, sent his Son to take our punishment on the dunghill of cavalry so that in Him we would find a new life. 


We disrupted the house of God, yet Christ willingly died on a beam from his own house - his creation. We destroyed the temple, but because of Christ, the temple is now built within us, secured by the Holy Spirit. Brothers and sisters, have we become complacent to this? Let us worship our Lord, who has covered our nakedness with the royal robes of Christ’s righteousness.


Consider

1. Have you become indifferent over your transgressions against God’s law?