Ephesians 3:1: Prisoner of Christ
April 4, 2020

1 For this reason I, Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles ...

(yeah it's just verse one today)

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Before diving into the specific verses of chapter 3, it’s important to take a step back and read the entire chapter to get a sense of Paul’s flow in writing. Notice how Paul begins v1 by saying “For this reason, I, Paul ...”. Normally “for this reason” is a phrase that takes the thoughts that precede it and connects them to a response that follows from it, yet we see this sentence is cut off (try reading it). We are left wondering, what follows from “this reason”? What is Paul’s response to the things he has said?

This is why we need to take a step back, read forwards and backwards, and then return to v1. First, what is “this reason”? Do you remember what Paul talked about in chapters 1-2? Paul proclaimed a handful of rich truths: the predestination in Christ (Eph. 1:4), inheritance in Christ (Eph. 1:11), unity in Christ (Eph. 2:13), and life in Christ (Eph. 2:5), to name a few. When Paul says “for this reason, I, Paul,...”, he is saying “because of these truths, I…”.

But then you might notice that v2-v13 is just a continuation of more awesome, encouraging, and powerful Gospel truths. It’s as if Paul couldn’t help but keep talking on and on about how stunning this revealed mystery of the Gospel is - so much so that he interrupts himself in v1 to proclaim truths about God for another 12 verses! 

But finally, in v14, Paul finishes his progression of thought. Paul says, “For this reason I bow my knees before the Father”. All of these truths that Paul writes in chapter 2-3 lead to a response in prayer! And what does Paul pray for? In short, he wants these Christians to truly understand “what is the breadth and length and height and depth” of the love of Christ! 

This is an important primer for reading the book of Ephesians. This is a book filled with doctrinal truths, and when we read them, we need to learn to respond like how Paul wants the church of Ephesus to respond. These truths need to captivate our hearts so that we know the depth of Christ’s love, and if they don’t, we need to pray until they do. If our hearts are hardened, and if this book is no more than words on a page (or pixels on a screen) to us, Ephesians is of no use!

So, before looking at v1, let's spend some time reading all of Ephesians 2-3 (which isn’t that long), allowing these truths to preach to our hearts.

Now, let's go back to v1. Notice how Paul calls himself a prisoner of Christ Jesus. Paul purposefully uses the word “prisoner” because while he was writing this letter, he was indeed in prison, specifically as a prisoner of Caesar. At least that’s how many Christians probably thought of it. But instead, Paul sees himself as a prisoner of Christ. It’s not Caesar who determines the day Paul is set free; it is Christ, far above all rule and authority (Eph. 1:21), who determines when Paul is put into chains and when Paul is set free. 

Is this also the case for you? Paul was specifically in house arrest in Rome (Acts 28:30-31), while many of us are likewise quarantined in our homes. Do we forget that we are not a prisoner of COVID19 but that we are instead a prisoner for Christ? It is not COVID19 that determines when we are set free or what conditions we are to bear, but it is instead Christ who determines these things for God’s glory.

What does it mean for us to be a prisoner of Christ? Are we in an unfortunate circumstance, such that we should be pitied? No! That’s why Paul tells the church not to feel sorry for him when he says “I ask of you not to lose heart over when I am suffering for you, which is your glory” (Eph. 3:13). In our captivity, as prisoners of Christ, everything is for his glory and in that we ought to rejoice. We ought to be like Paul, who writes and mediates on the “immeasurable riches of Christ” (Eph. 3:8) with delight! We ought to mirror how Paul does not cease to give thanks for his fellow saints (Eph. 1:15). We ought to pray in response to how good God is, asking to know His goodness even more (Eph 1:15-23, 3:14-21)! We ought to be evangelizing like Paul who made it known throughout the whole imperial guard that his imprisonment is for Christ, causing other Christians to be “much more bold to speak the word without fear” (Phil. 1:12-14). If we do not have these qualities, are we forgetting that we belong to Christ, that we are not a captive of COVID19? 

At the end of v1, Paul writes that this imprisonment is “on behalf of you Gentiles”. This is because of several things. First, Paul was arrested because he was spreading the Gospel to the Gentiles. Secondly, Ephesians 1:13 says it was for “your glory”; the glory of the Gentiles is Christ himself, and through Paul’s imprisonment, Christ is glorified as Paul lays down his life for the advancement of the Gospel in love. Moreover, there are circumstances that came about from this imprisonment that benefitted the Gentiles. Not only was the Gospel spread throughout the imperial guard (who are Gentiles), but Paul was also able to write the books of Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians and Philemon, which were used mightily by God as Scripture. 

Likewise, our imprisonment may lead us to glorify Him in ways we would not have done otherwise. In the quietness of isolation, we have an opportunity to wrestle with God and pray for hours without any distraction. And just like how the imperial guard notices something different in Paul, perhaps our non-Christian friends may notice something different in us and come to know Him. Let’s rejoice that as prisoners of Christ, God will have all the glory!


Consider

1. Meditate on this question: Are you a prisoner of Christ or a captive of COVID19?

2. Delight in “the breadth and length and height and depth” of the love of Christ:
How deep the Father's love for us
How vast beyond all measure
That He should give His only Son
To make a wretch His treasure