Ezra 5:1-2: Rebuilding in Faith
July 25, 2020

1 Now the prophets, Haggai and Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel who was over them. 2 Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak arose and began to rebuild the house of God that is in Jerusalem, and the prophets of God were with them, supporting them.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Because the work of the Lord had ceased due to schemes of the adversaries, God sent two prophets to exhort His people back to working for His purpose. Verse 1 says two prophets came in the name of the God of Israel: Haggai and Zechariah. Most of you may recognize that the words of these minor prophets are found in the Old Testament, but some of you may not be familiar with how they fit into Israel’s exilic history.

We can see from verse 2 that God's word powerfully worked through these prophets. As a result, Zerubbabel and Jeshua once again began leading the people to rebuild the house of God. They did this even before they got direct permission from King Darius. Haggai and Zechariah reminded them that it was the Lord’s will for the temple to be rebuilt and so they placed their faith in the sovereign God that they served. 

Brothers and sisters, do we understand the sovereignty of God? For not a single thing in this Earth will come to pass unless the Lord allows it. In continuing to build the Temple, these people understood the words of Psalms 33: The LORD foils the plans of the nations; he thwarts the purposes of the peoples. But the plans of the LORD stand firm forever, the purposes of his heart through all generations (Ps. 33:10-11). Let us also recognize that in all circumstances, no authority on Earth can stand against what God has commanded to pass. For God is the “the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords” (1 Tim. 6:15).

Let us examine the words of Haggai and Zechariah to see how God used them to rebuild the faith of the Israelites.

Haggai rebuked the people for making excuses. Haggai 1:2 says “Thus says the Lord of hosts: These people say the time has not yet come to rebuild the house of the Lord.” The people of Israel were making the same excuse that many of us are guilty of today. The Israelites did not act because they believed it was the wrong timing. These people should have been restless over the fact that the work of God had been stalled, but instead, Haggai 1:4 reveals that they were content to “dwell in [their] paneled houses, while this house lies in ruins”. Thus, in Haggai 1:8, the Lord calls His people back into action, saying, “Go up to the hills and bring wood and build the house, that I may take pleasure in it and that I may be glorified”. Brothers and sisters, let us listen to the words of Haggai and not procrastinate until the “timing is right”.  

While Haggai exhorted the people back to work, Zechariah’s message spoke to the spiritual condition of the Israelites. Zechariah’s message reminded them that God was not merely interested in the Temple itself but also for His people to love and worship Him. We see the Lord declare in Zechariah 1:3 “Return to me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will return to you”. By pointing to the Messiah to come, Zechariah’s words were an encouraging reminder of God’s care and steadfast faithfulness.  

Though the people failed to rebuild the temple, God continued to take the initiative through Haggai and Zechariah so that His work would be accomplished. We see in verse 2 that these prophets of God not only ministered to the people, but also worked alongside them. 

Brothers and sisters, let us be encouraged not only by the words of these prophets, but by the finished work of Christ. For God sent Christ to complete the Temple that we could not rebuild. Christ not only holds all authority, but like these prophets, he works alongside us and presents us with the privilege to share in his sufferings and his glory. 

We must not procrastinate our work for the Lord. The “timing” will always be wrong if we continue to rely on our own judgement. Take heed to these words from Haggai: “Go up to the hills and bring wood and build the house, that I may take pleasure in it and that I may be glorified”. Let us do this not legalistically, but rather by looking at the cross with hearts of praise and running through all the good works that God had prepared for us to do!

Consider

1. What is a commitment that you have brushed aside under the excuse of “bad timing”? Have you forgotten about it already? Examine your heart and make sure that your decision is rooted in God’s will rather than your own. 