Ezra 6:6-7: A Royal Protection

August 5, 2020

6 “Now therefore, Tattenai, governor of the province Beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and your associates the governors who are in the province Beyond the River, keep away. 7 Let the work on this house of God alone. Let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews rebuild this house of God on its site.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we see that King Darius orders Tattenai and all Persian officials to stop inhibiting the rebuilding of the temple and to leave the Israelites alone. That is, the King of the great Persian Empire had personally given the Israelites royal protection and providence in rebuilding their temple. Who would dare oppose them now? 


We can imagine the great sense of gratitude and security that the Israelites must have felt. Not only were they allowed to continue to rebuild the temple, but the king of the great Persian Empire himself was protecting them. 


Brothers and sisters, do we have the same sense of gratitude and security? For the King of Kings has promised that He is always with us (Matthew 28:20) and that He will protect us from the evil one (2 Thessalonians 3:3). 


Do we know the weight of this truth? The Creator of all things, the Almighty God of this universe, has graciously, mercifully, and inexplicably shown great concern for us. What a great sense of gratitude and security it is, that the God of the universe has promised that He will never leave us! 


Therefore, let us live boldly for the Lord, as those who are royally protected. When we face trials and persecution for advancing the Kingdom of God and living for the Gospel, let us not cower in fear, but let us take comfort in the fact that the King is ever with us and interceding for us (Romans 8:34). 


Furthermore, we must understand that King Darius giving the Israelites royal protection does not demonstrate his own providence or graciousness, but God’s. It was God that put it on the heart of King Cyrus to send the Israelites back to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple (Ezra 1:1). Similarly, it was God that was protecting the Israelites in this passage, and He was simply using King Darius as the instrument to do so. 


Brothers and sisters, this is the same God that we serve today. Let us not forget that our God is omnipotent and Lord over all, high above the authority of man. Let us not forget that this God has not only shown concern for us, but demonstrated his great love for us by sending His Son to die for us (Romans 5:8). 


Let us therefore live courageously for the Kingdom, trusting in His great providence and love for us.


Consider


1. Are you reminded that God is always with you? Do you understand the weight of this?

2. Do you live boldly for the Kingdom of God, as one that truly trusts that God is with them? 