Ezra 3:4-5: Foreigners in Their Homeland

July 15, 2020


4 And they kept the Feast of Booths, as it is written, and offered the daily burnt offerings by number according to the rule, as each day required, 5 and after that the regular burnt offerings, the offerings at the new moon and at all the appointed feasts of the Lord, and the offerings of everyone who made a freewill offering to the Lord.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Today, we see the returning exiles observing the Feast of Booths, also called the Feast of Tabernacles. During this event, the Israelites were to live in tents, or “booths” for one week, as a reminder of their time in the wilderness after their exodus from Egypt. More specifically, they were to recall God’s faithfulness during that time and joyfully celebrate it. 


However, what is especially significant about this specific Feast of Booths is the fact that the returning exiles are once again in the “wilderness.” That is, though they returned to Jerusalem, their temple is destroyed and their land is barren. Therefore, celebrating the Feast of Booths was not simply a reminder of God’s past faithfulness after the exodus from Egypt, but a testament to God’s current faithfulness after returning from Babylon. 


Not only did the returning exiles observe this feast, but we see that they observed it carefully. They observed each and every specific sacrifice for this feast that was outlined in Numbers 29:12-38. Furthermore, they continued to offer “freewill sacrifices” (verse 5), meaning that they offered more than what was required of the law, despite not having much to give. It is safe to say that these exiles were truly expressing their gratitude and trust in God’s faithfulness. 


Brothers and sisters, do we actively remember God’s faithfulness in our lives and trust in Him? Just as the returning exiles remembered God’s past faithfulness despite living in the “wilderness” of the destroyed Jerusalem, we too must remember and celebrate God’s faithfulness as we wait for our Savior’s return. 


This morning, let us actively meditate on God’s great faithfulness that He has demonstrated in our own lives. Let us meditate on the fact that 2000 years ago, God sent His only begotten Son as the greatest demonstration of His love and faithfulness towards us. Let us meditate on such things, and let us praise Him for it and declare our complete trust in Him. 


Brothers and sisters, we are told throughout the Old Testament that the Israelites sinned when they did not acknowledge God or remember what He had done for them (Judges 2:10). Let us not fall into the same trap, but rather let us continually focus on His gracious goodness towards us. 


Consider


1. Do you actively remember God’s faithfulness in your own life?

2. What is your first response when going through a trial? Is it to remember who God is and His love for you?