Ezra 7:21-24: A Reverent Dutiful Offering

August 15, 2020


21 “And I, Artaxerxes the king, make a decree to all the treasurers in the province Beyond the River: Whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, requires of you, let it be done with all diligence, 22 up to 100 talents of silver, 100 cors of wheat, 100 baths of wine, 100 baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much. 23 Whatever is decreed by the God of heaven, let it be done in full for the house of the God of heaven, lest his wrath be against the realm of the king and his sons. 24 We also notify you that it shall not be lawful to impose tribute, custom, or toll on anyone of the priests, the Levites, the singers, the doorkeepers, the temple servants, or other servants of this house of God.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

We saw in yesterday’s devotional how King Artaxerxes generously provided the Israelites with resources for their offerings and temple services. Today, not only do we continue to see King Artaxerxes’s generous provision, but we also see the reason why he is being so generous — he does not want the wrath of God upon himself. 


Interestingly enough, there is much that can be learned from King Artaxerxes in today’s passage. He shows a great reverence for the “God of heaven” (verse 23), and he does not withhold from God. If a pagan king was filled with such reverence and fear of the Lord, how much more should we as believers be filled with such reverence!


Even the fact that King Artaxerxes recognizes that the Israelite God is the “God of heaven” (verse 23) is surprising. This is the king of the great Persian empire, whose power and glory was world-renown. And yet, by addressing the Israelite God as the “God of heaven”, he acknowledges that the Lord is indeed a higher and mightier authority than even himself. 


Though not a perfect example, let us learn from the humility of King Artaxerxes. While pride seeks to make much of oneself, humility seeks to make much of God, which is exactly what King Artaxerxes is doing here. 


Brothers and sisters, do our lives exemplify such humility? Do we see ourselves as the most important person in our lives? Do our own thoughts, emotions, and opinions matter the most to us? Let us have an even greater humility than that of King Artaxerxes, for we personally know the God of heaven that we must esteem above all else. 


Furthermore, note that recognizing that the Israelite God is the “God of heaven” is followed by the command to do whatever is decreed by Him (verse 23). These two must always go hand in hand. That is, recognizing who God is must always lead us to fall flat on our faces and bow down in obedience to the Lord. 


We cannot claim to know God when we do not have a reverent obedience for Him. We cannot claim to be Christians if we continue to live in unrepentant sin, unwilling to give up certain habits, thoughts, and desires. Rather, we must humble ourselves and dedicate ourselves as servants of the God of heaven. Even a heathen king recognized this — do we? 


Finally, we should also take note of King Artaxerxes’s recognition of the wrath of God in verse 23. Brothers and sisters, the wrath of God is an idea that has been so watered down by modern pulpits and churches who are afraid to teach the unapologetic and offensive message of the Gospel. However, we must all know the wrath of God, for without it we do not understand the Gospel. 


That is, without recognizing the wrath of God, we do not recognize the punishment that we all justly deserve. Without recognizing the wrath of God, we do not recognize just how agonizing Jesus’s death upon the cross was, for He took the full wrath of God upon Himself. Without recognizing the wrath of God, we cannot truly understand the Gospel message. 


Therefore, let us have an even greater understanding of the wrath of God than King Artaxerxes. Let us be eternally grateful for being saved from this wrath. However, for those of us that continue to live in unabashed and unapologetic sin, let us heed the word of God in Revelation 21:8: 


“But as for the cowardly, the faithless, the detestable, as for murderers, the sexually immoral, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars, their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death.”


This morning, let us all learn from King Artaxerxes. For though he was a worldly king, he showed a reverence and fear of the Lord that we must all have. 

	


Consider


1. Do you revere and fear the Lord? 

2. Is our confession of who God is corroborated by your servitude to Him?