Ezra 6:3-4: A Larger Temple
August 3, 2020

3 In the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king issued a decree: Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the house be rebuilt, the place where sacrifices were offered, and let its foundations be retained. Its height shall be sixty cubits[a] and its breadth sixty cubits, 4 with three layers of great stones and one layer of timber. Let the cost be paid from the royal treasury.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


If we read back to the construction of the temple by the wise king Solomon, we will be able to see that the new temple decreed to be built was, in fact, of larger dimensions. Solomon’s temple had been “sixty cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high” (1 Kings 6). In today’s passage, we read that the new temple’s “height shall be sixty cubits and its breadth sixty cubits” (verse 3). The second temple would be a significantly larger construction, and possibly a grander house for God.

Why the larger temple? Well, quite simply, it may have just been the intention of King Cyrus to build a temple more glorious than that which had been destroyed. A grander, larger house would be a greater testament to the power of God, and well, to be honest, to the king’s own strength in his ability to provide for God. Not only that, King Cyrus, by building a larger temple, would be able to please God better than if he had built a smaller one. Surely, God would favor a more spacious house than a smaller one!

Well, no matter what the intentions of the earthly king were, we must inquire into the intentions of the one King to whom we owe our fullest of devotion towards. Why would God desire a bigger temple? We know, certainly, that it was not for the sake of His comfort— what kind of a physical house built by human hands could house a God that even the entire universe could not play footstool for? Was it to show God’s magnificence and power? Perhaps— yet that would seem unlikely as all of creation testifies in its grandeur of God’s magnificence far better than a human construction. Furthermore, the temple was not even properly furnished until Herod the Great’s rule— the temple would hardly be fitting in elaborating the beauty of God.

No, rather, I believe that the temple being enlarged was not man’s commitment for God, but God’s commitment for man. God was showing that He would dwell even more immensely among the Israelites.

We see in the prophet Ezekiel chapter 40 a blueprint for the new temple that will be built in Jerusalem. This temple is far bigger than the original temple and even larger than the second temple that is built by Zerubabbel. Ezekiel received this prophecy of the new temple when he was an exile before the events of this passage. You see, God was giving this vision of the new temple as hope for the Israelites. To Ezekiel, God was saying, “I will build an even greater temple than the old.”.

Yet, one may notice that the temple in Ezra is far smaller and far lesser than that promised to Ezekiel. Did God run out of funding for His temple project?

Well, obviously not. Rather, what we must understand about this slightly larger temple of the exiles is that this is a partial fulfillment and even still just a foretaste of the greater temple to come. The temple built by Zerubabbel would be a bigger temple to show God’s continued presence with Israel, and even more, the intensification of His presence among the exiles. However, this temple built by human hands would not be the fullest measure of God’s dwelling amongst men.

The greatest temple would be built by God in the hearts of men through the work of the Great High Priestly King, Jesus Christ. The temple of Zerubabbel would testify of the temple of Jesus, and it would further advance the hope of the Israelites who were looking forward to a temple that would never perish and could never be touched by the hands of the enemy.

God, in His mercy, gave Israel a reminder of His promise through the second temple. He made it larger to show that God’s plan to be nearer and more present with Israel was coming closer to fruition. God, in His love, reminded Israel of His promise to Ezekiel of the greatest temple of Jesus through a reminder of a physical temple that the Israelites would have the honor of constructing.

Consider

1. Are you reminded that the temple lives within you?
2. If you are truly the temples of God (1 Corinthian 3:16), do you consecrate it and treat it as such?