Ezra 8:15-20: A Call for Ministers

August 19, 2020


15 I gathered them to the river that runs to Ahava, and there we camped three days. As I reviewed the people and the priests, I found there none of the sons of Levi. 16 Then I sent for Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and Meshullam, leading men, and for Joiarib and Elnathan, who were men of insight, 17 and sent them to Iddo, the leading man at the place Casiphia, telling them what to say to Iddo and his brothers and the temple servants at the place Casiphia, namely, to send us ministers for the house of our God. 18 And by the good hand of our God on us, they brought us a man of discretion, of the sons of Mahli the son of Levi, son of Israel, namely Sherebiah with his sons and kinsmen, 18; 19 also Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, with his kinsmen and their sons, 20; 20 besides 220 of the temple servants, whom David and his officials had set apart to attend the Levites. These were all mentioned by name.



*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In today’s passage, we see Ezra gather and search out for the ministers of the LORD. These ministers were of the special line of Levites. We had talked about the priests, a particular subset of these Levites, in the prior chapter, and here we talk about the larger tribe as a whole who were called to the designation of the caretakers of the temple and the worship of the LORD.


When Ezra initially searched for the Levites when encamped for three days, he could not find a priest or minister who was from the line of Levi. Even those who are “priests” are not from the tribe of Levi and hence they cannot give proper worship to God. For a so-called priest to not be of the Levite descent would have meant that he was not of the proper calling from God. A minister not set apart in the line of Levi would be no minister at all.


Ezra immediately calls for proper ministers for the house of God to be sent so that worship at the temple can be facilitated. In response, a small group of Levites are sent and they are listed here in our passage today.


We do not have a modern equivalent to the Levites in today’s Church. There is no special line that can become the ministers to the LORD. There are no restrictions based on your genetic line that determine your right or ability to serve the LORD. Instead all of the Church has been called to a royal priesthood and the Church is to worship the LORD directly.


However, there are a certain few who are called to be ministers to the proper facilitation of worship every Lord’s Day. Ephesians 4:11 talks about them as “the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the shepherds and teachers”, and these people have a somewhat analogous relationship to the Levite ministers in their duties and roles, but not in their genetic distinction.


Just as the Levites were of a special calling, the modern day minister is specially called to his ministry. Both are called to their job though one is called via his bloodline, and the other is called by a spiritual line. The minister is not a minister because one day he had an inclination to speak in front of people, but a minister is a minister because he has been called by God to preach what He has already spoken through the Word of God. Every true minister to the LORD is specially set apart.


This brings us to the first criteria of a minister. The minister ought to be set apart. The minister is to be different and to be separated from the rest of the world so that they may be able to lead worship for the rest of the congregation. It would be quite concerning if you saw your minister whom you listen to every Sunday drinking away his life’s problems night after night at the local bar. Instead, they should be the prime example of what it means to be holy before God. They are to show, even to the point of being excluded from the rest of the congregation, the holiness of God in their very lives. This is perhaps why the job is often described as being the loneliest job in the world.


A second of the criteria is shown in our passage, it is the requirement of the man to have discretion. The man ought to be able to determine what is good and what is not. He is set as a special leader in the community and as such, he must be able to teach, rebuke, and guide— if he does not know what is right from wrong, he would be a blind man leading the blind. This means that the man must be learned in the way of the LORD, and must be gifted to present it to the congregation. This again sets the minister into a lonely position as it is hard for the teacher to be friends with the students.


These are just two of the many criterias of a minister that the Bible presents.


So, why should we care about this? Why should we care about the calling of a minister? Well, firstly, it is to ask if we are called. However, even if you are not, knowing what a minister is called to and how helps our fellowship with them. That is, if we know that they have many criterias, we would hold them accountable. Furthermore, knowing the position that it puts them in, we would also know that we must love and care for them in ways that differ from how they care for us.


Consider


1. Have you thought about how heavy the weight of being a minister is?