Ezra 7:11-14: Freely Servants of God

August 13, 2020


11 This is a copy of the letter that King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe, a man learned in matters of the commandments of the Lord and his statutes for Israel: 12 “Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, Peace, And now 13 I make a decree that anyone of the people of Israel or their priests or Levites in my kingdom, who freely offers to go to Jerusalem, may go with you. 14 For you are sent by the king and his seven counselors to make inquiries about Judah and Jerusalem according to the Law of your God, which is in your hand.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


As a continuation on the devotionals from these past two days, the passage we read about today elaborates on the letter Artaxerxes gave to Ezra regarding his journey to Jerusalem.


Immediately in verse 11, we are given a clear description regarding Ezra and his expertise, “learned in matters of the commandments of the Lord and his statues for Israel.” This should be no surprise given the context from yesterday’s devotional, “For Ezra had set his heart to study the Law of the Lord.”


Ezra is clearly no layman. Not only did he receive much physical blessings as brother Handa elaborated on yesterday, in verse 12 we are reminded again of his blessing and responsibility, “the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven.” Ezra was already well regarded in Babylon and had responsibilities. Yet the responsibility he is now given, as we will continue to see, is a bit different.


Turning to verse 14, we read that the main objective given to Ezra is “to make inquiries about Judah and Jerusalem according to the Law of your God.” As a qualified priest, Ezra is entrusted with this rather large task that is quite important to Artaxerxes. We are shown the degree of trust Ezra has from Artaxerxes at the end of verse 14, “which is in your hand,” as Ezra is now given the primary responsibility over this matter.

 

With the multitude of blessings in Ezra’s life and now in this case the wonderful opportunity he is given, one could imagine the sense or even burden of responsibility Ezra was possibly feeling. Yet as we will continue to see in future devotionals, any possible worrying thoughts about his  responsibility will not phase him due to the greater focus and concern he has regarding his duty.


To further understand what that greater focus is, let us look back again to verse 10 but now to the second half, “and to do it and to teach his statutes and rules in Israel.” Ezra may have had natural responses of concern regarding his assignment from the king but since he prioritized and was so set on teaching the Law of the Lord, everything else unrelated to that goal became negligible.


An even more astonishing detail regarding this passage is the authority given to Ezra in order to establish the Mosaic law, given the secular ways of the king and the nation. As shown in verse 13, “I make a decree that anyone of the people of Israel or their priests or Levites in my kingdom, who freely offers to go to Jerusalem, may go with you” king Artaxerxes gives a generous amount of freedom to the Jews. While Artaxerxes did such things for his own benefit to further manage others and maintain his authority, in the end his decision worked to fulfill God’s will.


This situation clearly displays the beauty of God’s sovereignty. He is under no limitations and clearly uses unexpected situations or even secular nations to further glorify himself and fulfill what he has already predestined.


So let us look to Ezra as an example to prioritize the duties that are greater and also trust in God who is sovereign and wise. 


Consider

1. How does the world and its duties compare to your duties for God?

2. How do they relate and differ?

3. What responsibility do you have in terms of God’s kingdom?

4. In what ways have you seen God turn something possibly bad into good?