Ezra 3:6-7: Preparing the Second Temple
July 16, 2020

6 From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to the Lord. But the foundation of the temple of the Lord was not yet laid. 7 So they gave money to the masons and the carpenters, and food, drink, and oil to the Sidonians and the Tyrians to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea, to Joppa, according to the grant that they had from Cyrus king of Persia.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we finally begin to see the rebuilding of the temple. While we may be tempted to gloss over this chapter in Ezra and simply think of it as the recounting of the temple being rebuilt, there is actually much to learn from the hearts and actions of these returning exiles. From today’s passage specifically, there are three things we can learn about service and worship to the Lord. 

1) The Heart of Worship
Note that only after the altar had been built and regular worship was established did the returning exiles begin to rebuild the temple. By building the altar first, the exiles were expressing their prioritization of worship to the Lord, as well as the sincerity of their hearts. They knew that their primary purpose as servants of the Lord was to worship Him wholeheartedly, not to complete certain tasks for Him.

As for us today, it is so easy to get caught up in myriad projects for the church, which are indeed often good things. However, we must first ensure that our hearts are right before the Lord. That is, we must first commit ourselves to worshipping Him wholeheartedly and sincerely. 

2) The Fight Against Complacency 
There are some hyper-pragmatists who may read the passage and question why the exiles needed to rebuild the temple when they were already able to worship with simply the altar. Or there are some who read the first point on having the proper hearts of worship and use that as an excuse to not do anything else for the Lord other than “having the right heart.” 

However, we must realize that the true heart of worship before the Lord is one that constantly desires to grow in its affections and services for Him. We must have the heart of David, who although already worshipped God in a tent, desired to build a temple for the Lord because he wanted to give the Lord his best (2 Samuel 7). We must have the heart of these returning exiles who, though already worshipped on the altar, saw it fit to rebuild the entire temple of the Lord. 

Brothers and sisters, let us all constantly seek to give the Lord our best, rather than what is simply comfortable, for He is surely worthy of it all. 

3) God’s Providence for His Purposes
We see in verse 7 that the returning Israelites were provided the resources they needed to build the temple by the “grant they had from Cyrus.” However, we mustn’t credit this providence to Cyrus, but rather to God, as He was the one that “stirred up the spirit of Cyrus” (Ezra 1:1). In other words, God was providing everything necessary for His purpose of rebuilding the temple.

Brothers and sisters, let us not think that we are left on this earth to advance Christ’s Kingdom on our own. For our God sufficiently and faithfully provides according to His will and purposes, though we may not always know what those are. Therefore, let us boldly advance His cause, trusting in His providence. 

And let us not forget that God is currently showing His great providence for us through the Holy Spirit, which always dwells within us (1 Corinthians 3:16). Let us therefore take heart and work heartily for the Lord and His Kingdom. 

Consider

1. Do you have the right heart of service to the Lord? 
2. Are you eagerly seeking to always give the Lord your best?
3. Do you trust in God’s providence for the works that He has called you to? 