Ephesians 2:13-17: Peace with God and His People in Christ
April 2, 2020

13 But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off have been brought near by the blood of Christ. 14 For he himself is our peace, who has made us both one and has broken down in his flesh the dividing wall of hostility 15 by abolishing the law of commandments expressed in ordinances, that he might create in himself one new man in place of the two, so making peace, 16 and might reconcile us both to God in one body through the cross, thereby killing the hostility. 17 And he came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In yesterday’s devotional (Ephesians 2:11-12) we saw the hopelessness of the Gentiles. They were separated from the people of God and from God Himself, and they had no share in His covenant. They were “far off.” To add insult to injury, the Jews looked down on the Gentiles because of this, leading to further separation between the two groups.
In this moment of hopelessness, Paul points to “the blood of Christ” that brings us Gentiles near. The problem was estrangement and distance; the solution is nearness through the blood of Jesus.

Why the blood? We have to realize that the cause of all division is due to sin. So when this sin is removed, there is nearness for those “who were once far off.” But sin doesn’t just disappear. In fact, we know from the Bible that sin must be paid for. And for those who believe in Christ, His blood pays this price in full. Therefore, we who are no longer slaves to sin (Romans 6) in Jesus are brought near. 

What does this mean?  For one, it means that “there is no dividing wall of hostility” between Jew and Gentile, or between any believers for that matter. In the times of the Bible, there were literal walls in the temple that marked off sections for Jew and Gentile. Furthermore, the laws of the Jews were often used as a “wall” to distinguish themselves from Gentiles, whether it be their strict dietary restrictions or their practice of circumcision. 

But since Jesus “abolish[ed]” the law, there is no longer this basis for hostility between Jew and Gentile. The law was abolished because Jesus perfectly fulfilled the law and all who believe are declared righteous in Him. Therefore, there is no basis for distinction between Jew and Gentile, as they are now both under the Lordship of Jesus Christ, not an exclusive law. 

Not only that, they are both “one” in Jesus. In other words, they are one body of Christ. That is why the text says “that he might create in himself one man in place of the two.” It is a new identity for both Jew and Gentile. Rather than their ethnic or cultural backgrounds, their greatest identity was now Jesus Himself. For all who believe, their greatest identity is Jesus. 

The more important implication is that Jesus “reconciles us to God” by making us righteous before God (as explained earlier). Imagine being hostile towards the Almighty Creator, and that is exactly where we were because we are sinful creatures. However, Jesus’s death and blood makes us sinless before God, so this hostility is gone! 

Therefore, the only basis of peace, both with others and with God Himself is Jesus Christ. It does not matter whether Jew or Gentile, poor or rich, young or old. The only thing that matters is whether we are in Jesus or not. So brothers and sisters, let us truly ask ourselves this morning “am I in Christ?” Until then, you have no basis of reconciliation with others. Until then, you have no basis of reconciliation with the omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent God. 

Consider

1. What is our greatest identity? There are many identities this world has to offer on the basis of race, occupation, school, etc. But there is only one identity that matters: in Jesus or  not.

2. Do we still distinguish ourselves from other believers? Perhaps we find certain brothers and sisters annoying or a bit overbearing. Perhaps we say that we are different from those other Christians. Let us truly reflect on this.