Ephesians 3:7-10: The Power of the Gospel
April 6, 2020

7 Of this gospel I was made a minister according to the gift of God's grace, which was given me by the working of his power. 8 To me, though I am the very least of all the saints, this grace was given, to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, 9 and to bring to light for everyone what is the plan of the mystery hidden for ages in God, who created all things, 10 so that through the church the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly places.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Often when we think of Jesus’s life on earth, His ministry, His humiliation, and His death on the cross, we often get a misguided understanding of Jesus as a weak and feeble being unable to protect Himself against the tyranny of human sinfulness. We see only a bloodied Jesus on the cross who seems so weak and powerless before the Roman guards taunting and casting lots for His clothing.

Jesus did, of course, not count His deity to be something to be grasped when He came to earth (Philippians 2:6-7), but that does not mean He was not the conquering King, the Lion of Judah (Revelation 5:5). He was the slain lamb, but through it He is the Lion.

That is what Paul is getting to us in this passage. In verse 7, Paul talks about the “working of his power” — that is, God’s, and this, we may, at the surface level, see  as God’s exercising of divine authority in revealing to Paul the Gospel (Galatians 1:11-12). However, not only is Paul talking about the one occurrence at which he received the Gospel when he talks about the power of God, but He is talking about the entirety of the exercise of God’s power in allowing for such Gospel to be made possible for him, a persecutor of the Church (Galatians 1:13). God’s “working of his power” stretches to the whole of the Old Testament, and reaches a climax at the cross where Jesus, through His weakness, reveals the greatest extent of His power.

We, as Christians, assert that the Gospel, the idea that God died for man, is power. That would have surprised the people of the times — the supposed God of the universe dying at the hands of mortals? Zeus, or Poseidon, or Hades would have merely smitten any mortal daring to touch the gods. Yet, because our God is so mighty, He dies for mankind as they cannot meet the mighty standard He desires. He is so powerful that His stepping off the throne does not demean His magnificence, but it magnifies Him even more. This is the God who turns Paul, the supposed “least of all the saints” (if he’s the least, what are we?), into a preacher to the Gentiles (verse 8). Christ is God so magnificent that He is the “unsearchable riches” a man would sell all things to acquire (Matthew 13:44). This is the all-creating God who created all that we know and see so that the mystery of the Gospel is hidden in it so as to reveal the glory of Christ that all may worship Him as a result of it (verse 9).

Our Gospel is the good news from such a God. He had known us from before us birth and had planned for us all to be where we are right now even before time began (Psalm 139:13-14) In this powerful and magnificent God, we have all the authority and power given by Christ as we are the church through whom “the manifold wisdom of God” is known to even the heavenly rulers and authorities (verse 10).

The death and resurrection of Christ, though seemingly a story of weakness and failure, is actually for the Christian the power of the God given to us in the nicely wrapped package of the Gospel. Through it, we the Gentiles have received “the unsearchable riches of Christ,” (verse 8) and have been the vessels through which God’s wisdom is revealed even to “the rulers and authorities in the heavenly places” — that is, the angels and demons.

The Gospel is power to us because it points to the God who created us, the Son who died and lives for us, and the Spirit who lives in us.

Consider

1. Is Gospel power to you? Or is it just another point of Christianity that you lug along?
2. Have you ever been ashamed of the Gospel? Should we be?
3. What is the “unsearchable riches of Christ” worth to you?