Ezra 5:6: Recorded for Posterity
July 27, 2020

6 This is a copy of the letter that Tattenai the governor of the province Beyond the River and Shethar-bozenai and his associates, the governors who were in the province Beyond the River, sent to Darius the king. 


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


One of the greatest features of the book of Ezra is the extent to which the records are kept. We have seen this exceptional recordkeeping in the second chapter of this book when the names of the fathers of the families that came back from Babylon are recorded. We have also witnessed this faithful recording in how even the names of the adversaries and foreign officials are kept. In later chapters, we will even see the record of the names of people who have shamed the name of the LORD.

Similarly, in today’s chapter, we see that the writer of Ezra has kept a careful record of the names of the governors who came to question the work of the Israelites. The names of the observers of work of the Israelites are recorded and the receiving end of the letter is also recorded.

We will discuss the exact details of the letter in the coming days, but for today, let us try to understand why the writer was so painstakingly careful in recording every detail of the events that occurred to the Jews. We will do this by analyzing our passage today.

We can divide today’s passage into three parts: the description of the item to be recorded, the writers of the item, and the recipient of the item.

“This is a copy of the letter” — firstly, the identity of the item in discussion is clarified. The writer of Ezra makes it clear that the item that he is about to record is not just a paraphrasing of the letter, nor a description of the letter, but the very copy of the letter itself. Why is this important? Well, as we will see later, the letter shows the faithfulness of the Israelites from the perspective of the foreigners. It praises the actions of the Israelites for their work given unto the LORD, and the writer of Ezra wants to make it clear that he is not extrapolating an opinion but recording the actual words of the officials.

From this, we can see that the writer wishes to record the truth for the posterity. He is not elaborating on the true details— it is not “based on a true story”, but it is a true story.

“Tattenai the governor of the province Beyond the River and Shathar-bozenai and his associates” — secondly, we see that the names of the writers of the letter are recorded. These names that are recorded are further explained with their position and with their reason for being in the province Beyond the River. The men recorded are real men who have some purpose for being there. They all had their own jobs and roles outside of this particular incident, but somehow they had become involved in this incident. They are people who have a name and an identity outside of this particular story, but always within a greater story.

From this, we can see that the writer desires to show that not only was God using real people, but these people were people with a certain role to play in the greater story of the Gospel. Though the men may not have known it, they were being recorded into the eternal Word of God.

“Sent to Darius the king” — thirdly, we see for whom the letter was written. The letter was written for the highest power of the region. The king of Persia received the letter regarding the work of lowly men who were merely constructing a building.

From this, we can see that the writer desires to show that not only did God use real people with a special role to play in the Gospel story, but that God was planning for a story that appealed to the highest authorities, and to the Highest Authority that all authorities must point to — Yahweh.

Now, do I mean that the human scribe of this book had all these things in mind when keeping record? No, not necessarily. When I alluded to “the writer” throughout this devotional, I did not mean just the human scribe, but I meant the Holy Spirit. Perhaps the human scribe of this book was merely interested in being extremely thorough with his records. However, God used such a skill to develop a detailed Gospel story that the book of Ezra is a part of. God was keeping a record for the posterity who would come to know Him through the Messiah.

So, these details, every minute detail is pointing to a certain Gospel story which is firstly— absolutely true, secondly— full of ordinary men in a bigger story, and thirdly, a story fit to have God as the center.

Consider

1. How do you fit into the Gospel story?
2. How does the minute details of the Bible look to you? Do you value them?