Ezra 1:5: Stirring Up Israel
July 3, 2020

5 Then rose up the heads of the fathers' houses of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests and the Levites, everyone whose spirit God had stirred to go up to rebuild the house of the Lord that is in Jerusalem.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


How shall we sing the Lord’s song in a foreign land? If I forget you, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill! Let my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth, if I do not remember you, if I do not set Jerusalem above my highest joy! (Ps. 137:4-6)

This is the lament of Psalm 137, the cry of Jews in the midst of Babylonian captivity. Under the rule of a pagan nation, and through the disciple of the Lord, a portion of Judah began to turn back to God and long for Jerusalem. Ezra writes in verse 5 that the heads of Judah, Benjamin and the Levites rose to go rebuild the house of the Lord. Imagine the joyful cheer of these men upon hearing that king Cyrus has allowed them to return home - this must have been unbelievable news!

Yet despite this miraculous move of God, there were still those who decided to stay in Babylon. Though Babylon had smashed their infants, after seven decades the captives had become comfortable and accustomed in the very land of their affliction. For these people, cowardliness overshadowed a love for God.

Leaving Babylon certainly was no easy feat. Not only did these people have to leave their households and familiarity behind, but what stood ahead of them was a thousand mile trek in a hostile war-ridden desert. Even if they made it through this dangerous, expensive journey, it may not even be possible for them to successfully build the temple. They were heading back to Jerusalem, which was a pile of rubble. Yet God showed these people that He is truly sovereign; if He stirred the heart of the Persian King, He would surely use His people to rebuild the temple for His glory. In their decision to return to Jerusalem, these people demonstrated a deep desire for worship and a bold faith in God. 

As we read in verse 5, the reason these people rose up is because God had stirred their hearts. Just like how God took the initiative to bring us salvation, it was God who took the initiative to redeem his captive people. Recall in verse 1 that God also “stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia”. We see here that God works in both those He had chosen and those He had not chosen, convicting all parties to work for His glory. The primary end of this act was not for the happiness or fulfillment of the captives but rather that His glory may be revealed to the nations. 

Brothers and sisters, it is God who stirs. We must plead God to stir our hearts and grant us a vision to run after: a community of holy, worshipping, evangelizing Christians. Ezra writes how the heads of the fathers’ houses rose up - do we see this today? Men of God, quit acting like children. Learn to take initiative and stand up with integrity and fortitude. So often we stay up late finishing school projects or chatting with friends, but when is the last time you stayed up for the Lord? The road to revival is a difficult thousand mile trek, but we will see in Ezra how God blesses the fruit of those who take initiative for His Glory. 

Brothers and sisters, we live in Babylon. Let us not be content with this world, but let us restlessly seek God until He stirs our hearts to act boldly for His name.

Consider

1. Is God stirring in your heart? Turn to Him in prayer daily so that you may love your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength.
2. What activities keep you up at night? Do you prioritize them above God?