Ezra 6:19-22: The Passover

August 10, 2020

19 On the fourteenth day of the first month, the returned exiles kept the Passover. 20 For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves together; all of them were clean. So they slaughtered the Passover lamb for all the returned exiles, for their fellow priests, and for themselves. 21 It was eaten by the people of Israel who had returned from exile, and also by every one who had joined them and separated himself from the uncleanness of the peoples of the land to worship the Lord, the God of Israel. 22 And they kept the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven days with joy, for the Lord had made them joyful and had turned the heart of the king of Assyria to them, so that he aided them in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


The Passover was perhaps the most important of all the Jewish holidays. It was the celebration of God’s passing over the Israelites on the last plague of the ten plagues against their Egyptian overlords.


The Israelites sheltered in their homes in Goshen and slaughtered a lamb to eat all of its flesh and to mark the doorposts and lintel. None of the lamb was to remain till the morning and the lamb was to be eaten in the most hurried fashion with belts fastened and sandals on feets. Unleavened bread and bitter herbs were eaten together with the lamb.


On the first Passover, the angel of death passed over every house of the Israelites while entering every house of the Egyptians who did not fear the LORD. The very next day, howling and wailing filled the air as the parents of the many Egyptian firstborns mourned over the limp, lifeless bodies of their beloved children.


This at last broke the unwilling heart of the Pharaoh to let the Israelites go. The Israelites, already prepared in their traveling clothes from the night prior, left with the treasures of Egypt towards the promised land that God had promised. They traveled with haste and cooked for themselves unleavened bread as they had no time to wait for the bread to rise. They were commanded to eat unleavened bread for seven days and feast on the seventh day.


The Israelites would continue this tradition for thousands of years, including the year of our passage today. They would remind themselves of the goodness of God in freeing the Israelites while gifting the Israelites with the immense promises and life.


I imagine these exiles from Babylonia felt especially joyful as they realized the mercy of God once again. For these Israelites of our passage today, they would have felt as if they were celebrating a second exodus from the foreign lands as the second temple had now been rebuilt to ensure their ability to worship God in their promised land once again. The Israelites had once gained the ability to worship God properly after God’s great hand in rescuing them from Egypt. Now, as they celebrated Passover, they would regale themselves of the stories of their journey back to Jerusalem and the anecdotes of their temple construction.


We, Christians, also celebrate the Passover. However, we do not sacrifice a lamb, paint its blood on the doorposts and lintel, and eat its flesh. Instead tear bread and drink wine. We do not think about our escape from Egypt and the bondage of Pharaoh, but rather, we reflect on our past master, sin and death. We do not prepare for travel for one night with belts buckled and shoes laced, but we live every waking moment of our lives knowing that we are already on our travel back home.


We are Christians. Our Lamb has been sacrificed once— and it was enough for all of history. The blood of this Lamb has been pointed on the posts of the cross once— and it was enough for death to pass by us. The flesh of this Lamb and His blood we drink each communion we hold with our beloved local church. The might of the Lion strengthens our every stride as we travel home to our heavenly abode.


Jesus died on Good Friday on the day of Passover. On that day, as death passed over the Israelites, death also passed over all who choose to place their faith in Jesus Christ. From that day forward, Christians have always been traveling from the fatigue and encumberments of this fading life to reward and joy of the next just as the Israelites journeyed in the wilderness.


I hope that all of you are pilgrims as you read this devotional. I hope none of you are still in Egypt.


Consider


1. Have you eaten of the Passover lamb?