Ezra 2:40-42: The Levites

July 8, 2020


40 The Levites: the sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, 74. 41 The singers: the sons of Asaph, 128. 42 The sons of the gatekeepers: the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, and the sons of Shobai, in all 139.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

How carefully do we worship? 


This question seems odd at first. After all, we know that God “searches the heart” (Jeremiah 17:10). We tell ourselves that as long as “our hearts are in the right place,” the other details of worship can be overlooked. Or perhaps we read verses such as Hebrews 4:16 which tells us to “come boldly unto the throne”, and we think that we can approach God however we please. 


However, today’s passage provides a sobering reminder that God is not one who can be taken lightly, especially in worship. That is, from this seemingly uninteresting list of Levites and temple staff that returned from exile, we can actually learn much about the nature of worship that God desires. 


The first thing we can note from today’s passage is the sheer importance of worship. In the listing of the returning exiles, there is a great portion of text dedicated to the returning priests, Levites, and temple servants. Though the temple had not yet been rebuilt and Jerusalem was still in ruins, the temple staff returned from exile to lead the worship of God, highlighting the fact that worship must be a top priority in the lives of all who serve the Lord.


Let each one of us ask ourselves: what importance does worship have in my life? Brothers and sisters, worship is not simply singing a few songs once a week, but it is a daily, continual action. As Paul tells us in Romans 12:1, our “true spiritual worship” is presenting our bodies “as living sacrifices to God.” Does being a living sacrifice to God sit at the top of our priorities for the day? Or has some other task taken its place in our hearts? 


Furthermore, this passage teaches us the importance of worshipping God correctly. We can clearly see from the fact that there are priests, Levites, and temple servants that there is a structure to corporate worship. And the one that gave this structure of worship was none other than God Himself. Therefore brothers and sisters, let us realize that the only one who decides how God will be worshipped is God Himself!


We may be tempted to think that this was only true in the times of the Old Testament. However, there is clear guidance on worshipping God throughout the New Testament as well. We see the importance of communion in Acts 20:7, the importance of offering in 1 Corinthians 16:1-2, the importance of preaching from the word of God in Acts 2:42, etc. In short, let us not think that we can worship God in any way we please, but rather let us uphold what the Bible teaches about worship. 


The final thing to learn about worship from this passage is the importance of pure, unadulterated worship. The Levites and the priests could have very well stayed behind in Babylon, thinking that there was no difference between worshipping God in Jerusalem and worshipping in Babylon. 


The Levites that returned, however, knew better than this. They had a desire to worship God not in a foreign land that was full of idolatry and had no fear of God, but in Jerusalem where God had once dwelled. The Levites that returned had set themselves apart from the sinful lifestyles of the Babylonians in order to offer an unadulterated worship to God.


Brothers and sisters, is our worship to God pure and unadulterated? Do we dare to worship God while there is still unrepentant sin raging on in our lives? Do we come before God on Sunday mornings only to live like the rest of the world throughout the rest of the week? Let not our worship be polluted and tainted by sin in our lives.


Sadly, many of the Levites did not offer an unadulterated worship to God. Out of the many Levites in exile, we see today that only a handful chose to return to Jerusalem. As for us, let us be like the handful of Levites that chose to return to Jerusalem, making every effort to worship God correctly and wholeheartedly. 



Consider


1. What priority does worship have in your life?

2. Are you careful to worship God as He commands? 

3. Is your worship pure or is it tainted by unrepentant sin?