Ezra 5:7-8: Testimony of Faithfulness By Foreigners
July 28, 2020

7 They sent him a report, in which was written as follows: “To Darius the king, all peace. 8 Be it known to the king that we went to the province of Judah, to the house of the great God. It is being built with huge stones, and timber is laid in the walls. This work goes on diligently and prospers in their hands. 

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today, we dive deeper into the response from the people of the land when the rebuilding of the temple continues after a brief halt.

As seen yet again in verse 7, the people of the land turn to the king in order to stop the rebuilding process. We saw in Chapter 4 that after multiple unsuccessful attempts to infiltrate and hinder the rebuilding project themselves, the final straw was to turn to a different approach that would surely work: appeal to authority. 

While it worked temporarily, shown at the end of Chapter 4, the Jewish people return to rebuilding the temple, trusting and recognizing God’s will and purpose. Hence when the Jewish people are met with intimidation, they remain relatively unphased, trusting in the power and will of God.

When we look to the end of verse 7 and into verse 8 which covers part of the report that was written by the people of the land, we see a clear distinction between the people and a profound truth.

While these two verses only cover a short part of the letter, it still strikes a very similar tone to the previous letter sent to king Artaxerxes. 

In Chapter 4, the people of the land emphasize how they are for the king and more importantly how the efforts from the people of Israel are against him. This respectful tone and informative approach that is solely for the benefit of the king is reflected in these verses. 

At the end of verse 7, the people of the land begin their letter by not only addressing king Darius but also doing so in peace, “To Darius the king, all peace.” Continuing in verse 8, they respectfully address their action and observations as if they were simply witnesses, “Be known to the king that we went to the province of Judah, to the house of the great God” and “This work goes on diligently and prospers in their hands.”

Thus to the king, this letter may come off as an unbiased, respectful write up that is not only informative but also evidence of the Jewish people as lawbreaking individuals who only care about their own prosperity. This approach was clearly seen in the previous letter when the people of the land elaborated on this rebuilding project negatively affecting the royal revenue and also painted the Jewish people as disobedient, rebellious, and ultimately the cause of dishonor to the king.

However, this is nothing new for a Christian since the natural state of man despises God and often with it Christianity. This will inevitably lead to people doing whatever they can to slander and ostracize you. However, it would be a disservice to generalize every non-Christian as a devious individual who is always trying to prevent Christians from succeeding. But one will face hardships if pursuing the fulfillment of God’s will in their life; let us not assume but rather be prepared.

Similar to the Jewish people in this situation, first realize that there is no one greater or more powerful than our Father in heaven and trust in His will when we face intimidation from even the most powerful rulers. Furthermore, as Jesus states in John 19:11, “‘You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been given you from above.’” So fear not since everything that happens on earth has already been ordained by God. Absolutely nothing that happens on this earth is without God’s provision.

Consider
1. How has the world’s response to your faith or evangelism shaped your trust in God?
2. What influence has authority played in your faith?