Ezra 4:4-6: Frustrating the People of God
July 21, 2020

4 Then the people of the land discouraged the people of Judah and made them afraid to build 5 and bribed counselors against them to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus kings of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia. 6 And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today, we look deeper into the rebuilding project and more importantly the challenge it faces.

Already fearful of possible ramifications, the people of Judah inevitably became intimidated when the surrounding people found out and began to discourage them. While reading we may ask the question of “Why don’t they just trust God?” As often the case, it is much easier said than done. However, that should not be an excuse to doubt. 

The natural response to real life threats and consequences may be fear and doubt, but the detail that is more important is how we respond to such a situation. Remaining in fear and doubt actually undermines God’s power and puts you in His place. In this mindset, we ask the question “What will I do?” or “How can I overcome this situation” focusing solely on ourself and our ability to overcome the issue at hand, overlooking God’s immeasurable power. However if we first seek God and trust in what He can do then we can find peace knowing that our Father watches over us, his children.

Now starting from verse 5 we see a collection of very profound details, “bribed counselors against them to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.” Not stopping at discouraging the people of Judah, the people of the land bribed counselors to further hinder the project from the inside and make it harder for the people to continue. Such efforts are not made if something is a little bothersome but rather when something is detestable. 

Furthermore as we see in the second half of the verse, these efforts were made all the days of king Cyrus and even into the reign of king Darius. Persevering that long of a time elaborates yet again on how much the people of the land hated this project and more specifically God. 

Finally in verse 6 we see the last effort to stop this rebuilding project, “And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.” After failing to cause chaos and hinder the rebuilding of the temple themselves, the people of the land turn to making an accusation against them. These actions by the people of the land are very reflective of our world and the natural state of complete hatred against God it is in. As for the people of Judah, even with these harmful attempts to harm the progress of the rebuilding project, they persevered, trusting in God.

As a Christian, one will face similar difficulties for standing by the gospel. However these hardships from the world should not happen as a result of a radical, legalistic message but rather because the true gospel itself is controversial. “but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and folly to Gentiles.” (1 Corinthians 1:23)

So when we face a difficult situation let us first seek God in prayer, humbling ourselves before him. There is nothing in this world that is too big or too hard for God and furthermore since every single detail and situation has already been thoughtfully predestined, we can trust in His will.

By trusting in God’s will we are able to see how the hardship at hand actually sharpens us and how we can possibly share the gospel or even show God’s love to those who persecute us.

Consider
1. How have hardships relating to your faith shaped you?