Ezra 3:12-13: Lament and Praise
July 19, 2020

12 But many of the priests and Levites and heads of fathers' houses, old men who had seen the first house, wept with a loud voice when they saw the foundation of this house being laid, though many shouted aloud for joy, 13 so that the people could not distinguish the sound of the joyful shout from the sound of the people's weeping, for the people shouted with a great shout, and the sound was heard far away.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


The Solomonic Temple was a sight to behold. It was beautiful with gold inlays and well crafted furnishings that testified of God’s goodness and God’s dwelling with Israel. It showed that God was with Israel.

However, as we know, all of this changed when Israel sinned against God and God took away that presence. God took away the temple, and God took away all the people of Israel to a foreign land where they did not belong.

Now, when they did come back as we see in the passage, they laid the foundation of the temple. However, we see an interesting case. The old men, the men who had seen the temple before, weep and lament at the sight of the foundation being laid. Why?

Well, it’s because from seeing the new temple being built up, they are reminded of what they had lost. They are reminded of the beauty that once was the Solomonic Temple and how that beautiful temple had been lost. Furthermore, not only that, but with the temple had gone the presence of the Lord from Israel. God had sent Israel into exile and Israel had lost the most highest God of the universe.

However, I believe there is more to the lament and weeping of the old men. When they saw the foundation of the new temple go up, they remembered what had made the old temple go down. They remembered why God had left Israel to their demise and why God had allowed for the temple to be destroyed by the foreign nation. It was their sin, their disobedience against God that had forced God to unleash His wrath against Israel so that they would come back to Him. It was mercy that God poured out His wrath so that Israel would come back to Him.

As we see in the text, these old men, the sinners, are so weighed down by what sin brings to their lives. As the new foundations of the new temple go up, they are able to see what had brought down the foundations of the old temple. They are able to recognize that at the core of our being is our foundation of sin, our original sin.

This original sin has taken us away from the Garden, the Paradise, away from the presence of God, and robbed us of the joy we once had with God. We are to lament as well, we are to see the depths of our sins and ask, “God, where is the way out of this?”

Luckily, as Christians, we know the other side of the story, the next part of the story. We can actually get a glimpse of it from today’s passage as well. In today’s passage, we know that some of the men were rejoicing. They were shouting for joy. They were joyful because, nevertheless, a foundation was going up. God was starting something new.

For the Christian, the greatest foundation has gone up, and He is our rock. He is in our hearts, and He is always with us. We don’t have to be worried about the destruction of this temple or the failure of worship at this temple because this temple is ever perfect before God and the worship from this temple is ever glorifying to God. As we know, this temple is Jesus Christ.

I hope that from this passage, we will be able to see that we do have to lament our sinfulness. We have to be weeping and distraught over the sinfulness of our being and the wrath sin stirs up within Himself. At the same time we are to praise God for His goodness is giving us a righteousness foreign to us that is solid and everlasting because we have a temple who is our Priest, King and most importantly, Savior. A Savior who allowed us to worship God with joy though we do not deserve it through His own sacrifice.

Consider

1. How are we to lament our sins today?
2. How are we to praise God in how He rescued us from our own derelictions.