Ephesians 3:20-21: The Glory of the Cross
April 10, 2020

20 Now to him who is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think, according to the power at work within us, 21 to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

On this Good Friday, let us drop the busyness of our lives and fix our eyes upon the glory of the cross. As we close the third chapter of Ephesians, let us share in doing so by meditating on how Paul ends his prayer by giving glory to God. 

Verse 20 tells us who Paul is giving glory to, namely “to him who is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think”. When Paul writes “to him”, he is referring to God the Father, who in His power raised Christ “far above all rule and authority and power and dominion” (Eph 1:21). We know this because Paul specifically begins his prayer by saying “I bow my knees before the Father” (Eph 3:14). This connects with the second half of verse 20, “according to the power at work within us”, because it is precisely God’s power that allows us, through Christ, to call him Father when we are made alive by the Spirit, which both enlightens us and enables us (see Wednesday’s devo). This is the same power that made Paul, a persecutor of the Church, a minister with “the stewardship of God’s grace” (Eph 3:2). 

Let this be a reminder of why Good Friday is so good! When we say “Good Friday”, the adjective “good” is far more than its lackluster everyday usage. Rather, it describes the highest expression of Good that ever was, is, and will be. It is the cross that brings us regeneration in Christ so that we can call God “Father”. It is the cross that institutes the New Covenant, where God cleanses us and fills us with the power of the Holy Spirit (Eze 36:25-26). Echoing all of his parables and signs, Christ did something for us that we would never be able to do for ourselves - Christ was lost so that we could be found (Luke 15), Christ was forsaken so that we could be intimately known (Matt 27:46), Christ was made unclean so that we could be clean (Luke 8:43-48), Christ became thirsty so that we could have living water (John 19:28), and Christ became dead so that in Him we could have life (John 11:25)! 

Paul ends his prayer in verse 21 when he proclaims “to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus”. By this he refers to Christ, who is the head of the church, and the church, which is the body of Christ (Eph 2:16), giving glory to God as a collective whole, unified by one Spirit (Eph 2:18). Let us today give glory to God by responding to how Christ gave glory to God. 

Never forget that it was for the glory of God that Christ died. As it is written in the Gospel of John, “Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But for this purpose I have come to this hour. Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven: “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.” (John 12:27-28). 

Recognize that our sin not only defiles us, but it utterly dishonors God. Sin spits on and belittles an infinitely almighty God who rightfully deserves all of our worship. When we sin, we place this perfect God below filthy idols! How incredibly repulsive this is! For such a heinous crime to go unnoticed would be utterly unjust. But on Good Friday, as infinite glory was stripped away from Jesus, all of the glory of God that we detracted from Him in sin was fully restored. Herein lies the greatest act of justice that we remember on this “Good Friday”. As Christ vindicated God’s glory, it was a “fragrant offering and sacrifice to God” (Eph 5:2) for “it pleased the LORD to crush him” (Isa 53:10). 

Paul ends by saying this glory should be given to him “throughout all generations, forever and ever”. The Spirit is still working through us now, thousands of years later, pointing us towards what Christ did, since God’s plan is “for the fullness of time” (Eph 1:10). 

The crucifixion was more than perfect Justice - what Christ did on Good Friday was also perfect Love. As pastors often say, it wasn’t the nails that held Christ on that cursed tree but rather it was his Love that held him there. How joyful it is that God’s glory abounds so much that we can go on and on looking for the glories of Christ’s sacrifice and still not find it all. There is more glory in the cross than we can possibly imagine; its greatness is “immeasurable” (Eph 1:19), its riches are “unsearchable” (Eph 3:8), and its love “surpassess knowledge” (Eph 3:19). To this, let us with Paul say “Amen.”

###

On top of our normal exegetical devotional, we would also like to share a topical devotional inspired by the idea that God is “able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think” (verse 20). These next few paragraphs are incredibly important and practical, so we hope you enjoy reading it!

Do you believe in prayer? Few Christians would deny the power of prayer - scripture is riddled with calls to pray and speaks often of God being a Father who listens and answers prayer requests. We may have heard amazing testimonies of God answering prayer requests of famous Christians we respect such as John Piper, Paul Washer, or even certain Christians in our circles who are known for having experienced the power of God in extraordinary ways. For a lot of Christians however, there almost seems to be a disconnect in what we know God can do in prayer and what we believe God does. 

We say, “Is praying really going to change my circumstances? I mean isn’t everything predestined anyway? God works all things for good, so prayer is just a way for me to have conversation with God and not actually anything that actually has power.”

In my case, I realized that my low view of prayer was due to my unbelief. It was due to a low view of God. For me, even though I testified biblical truths about God, internally I did not believe them. In reality, even though I would never admit it at the time, I viewed God as a distant God who perhaps was not active in the affairs of man, while simultaneously having an ultimate good plan. I believed in what God did do through Jesus on the cross, and what God will do in the future in his second coming, but I now realized I doubted and underestimated God’s power and authority today. 

James 1:5-7 says, “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given him. But let him ask in faith, with no doubting, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind. For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord; he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.” Jesus himself says, “Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.” Is this a promise we believe in? We are instructed to ask in faith, and if we doubt, we shouldn’t expect anything. When we pray, do we believe that God is a living and active God, who “is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think”?

Peter, after denying Jesus three times, during the day of the Pentecost stands up, filled with the Holy Spirit, and preaches the gospel to a crowd that was composed of even the very same people that crucified Jesus. 5000 people were cut to the heart and came to Christ that day. He was not the most educated. He was not the most eloquent. In his weakness, God’s glory was displayed and Peter witnessed a historic day that showcased what God is truly capable of doing.

The Bible says that when we come to faith, we become like a dead man walking, someone who was asleep and “dulled” to the things of God, but suddenly awakened, alive, and now a completely new person. Oftentimes, in our evangelism, and in our own witness, we don’t truly believe that God is capable of even using our witness to cause our non-Christian friends to become born again. We naturally doubt God’s power and think, “I’d be lucky if they see Christianity as a rational counterpart to naturalism.”

The power of God is at work, and he alone is capable of making dead bones arise. He is God the Redeemer, who desires all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Through Jesus Christ’s first coming, he showcased his glory, and through his second coming, he came to wipe away sin and crush the “prince of the power of the air” once and for all. But when Jesus gives us the Great Commission to make disciples out of all the nations until the gospel reaches the ends of the earth, when Stephen was stoned to death and yet, being so filled with the Spirit, he “saw the glory of God” as the “heavens opened up”, when Peter preaches to the murderers of Christ and 5000 came to faith, when Paul counts everything as loss and endures the worst of beatings, starvation, imprisonment, and betrayal all for the “greater gain” of knowing Christ that he plants churches all across the world, surely they did not believe that God is only a God of the past and distant future. He is the God of the present who will show his glory throughout all generations, forever and ever. It’s the Lord’s guarantee. 

Lift up your dropping hands, strengthen your weak knees, and make straight paths for your feet. The Lord your God goes before you, he has come to establish dominion over all authorities in heaven and on earth. He has come to save his people, to raise them from the dead. Believe! Have faith in the power of God in prayer, in praise, and in works. He will restore his church. He will respond and show his glory in infinitely grander ways than you could ever imagine.


Consider

1. Why is Good Friday so “Good”? Spend some time to meditate and enjoy the simple Gospel.
2. Do you believe that God actually answers prayers?
3. Do you know he has glory, splendor, and power beyond your imagination?
4. Do you doubt his promise to sanctify and perfect you and use your living sacrifice to save others?