Ezra 2:1-2: Exiles Return
July 5, 2020

1 Now these were the people of the province who came up out of the captivity of those exiles whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried captive to Babylonia. They returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own town. 2 They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, and Baanah.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Israel had fallen into the hands of Babylon due to its continued reluctance to follow the Lord and to serve the Lord. We see throughout the Kings and Chronicles that Israel and Judah, the sister nations, serve other gods, carve idols, and place their faith in other nations. Hence, the Lord retreats His mercy from Israel to give them the desires of their hearts to serve the gods of their own hearts. God allows for the capture of the holy city, Jerusalem (2 Chronicles 36:17-21).

Yet, just as God had never left Israel to perish in the past, God retained and sustained the remnant even when all of Israel and Judah had lost the inheritance God had provisioned for their forefathers. These remnants, the protected line of Jacob who would continue the set apart nation of Israel are now returning to Israel according to God’s plan.

Now, as the list of returning exiles start here in chapter 2, we come across a very special name in verse 2. It’s the first name on the list of the leaders of the returnees from Babylon, and his name is Zerubbabel.

Now, why should we distinguish this name above the others? Why should we care about Zerubbabel? Well, for one, he was probably recognized as the foremost leader of the exiled community at Babylon. Also, as we read in Haggai, he was also the one to whom was given the command to go build the house of the LORD (Haggai 1:1-4). Yet, these raise further questions about his identity: Why was he specifically chosen to rebuild the temple? How was he considered to be the leader of the exiled Israel?

Well, to understand, we can go backwards into Israel’s history. Going all the way back to 2 Samuel 7:12-16, we see a covenant God makes with David. This is what we call the Davidic Covenant, and it points to the continuation of David’s line in the establishment of kings forever. Zerubbabel is so important to us because he is of the line of the Davidic kings descended from the throne of Judah. Zerubbabel is central to the faithfulness of God in keeping all of His promises even when Israel has failed so severely on their side of the bargain.

However, there is more. When we read forward this time in the Scriptures, to the New Testament Gospels, to Matthew 1:12-13 and Luke 3:27, we see Zerubbabel’s name once again— in the genealogy of Jesus.

You see, Zerubbabel is so important because he is the line of the King— that’s a capital K. He is a link in the Messianic chain that would lead to the promised eternal King of Israel, the Messiah, the Savior Jesus Christ. Along with the exiles returning to their homeland to rebuild the temple, there was the very hope and forefather of the Messiah leading them throughout the entire journey and even the temple building.

When the prophet Zechariah delivers the word of the LORD in chapter 4 of his book— “The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also complete it.” — God is not merely referring to the immediate fulfillment of the prophecy through Zerubbabel, but is foreshadowing and foretelling of the complete rebuilding of the temple in the hearts of men.

Zerubbabel comes to build the second temple that will meet its fate in 70AD— in the destruction of the temple and the Jewish age, but we have the greater Zerubbabel, Jesus Christ, who allowed the tearing down of the temple of His own body to raise it up once again on the third day (John 2:19). Jesus, as He says in John 4:21, builds up the temple of His own body, as the greater Zerubbabel, such that those who have Christ in them will worship in “spirit and truth” (John 4:23).

For us Christians, when we read the many names in the Bible, though we are reading the names of many dead Israelites whom we have never known personally before, we are reading them with the fully assured knowledge that all those names had a part to play in the greater redemptive history that reaches its climax in the person of Jesus whom we so well know personally and is verily alive among us today.

The next couple of passages will be somewhat drab to have to read, but I hope that we would be able to read with a mindset that focuses on the goodness of God’s care in counting every member of humanity towards the salvation plan accomplished in Christ.

Consider

1. Is God within us? It is necessary for us to have Christ in us for us to worship God. Do we act and live as if God is in us?