Ezra 3:1: Scattered Now Gathered as One Man

July 13, 2020


When the seventh month came, and the children of Israel were in the towns, the people gathered as one man to Jerusalem.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In today’s passage, we see the Israelites gather as “one man” in Jerusalem.


Imagine over a hundred thousand people gathering in one city for a celebration. The Israelites had gathered for the Feast of Booths— a celebration reminding them of the 40 years in the wilderness. The Israelites would set up tents to dwell in during the days of the feast and remind themselves of the struggles that God delivered Israel from. This time, the Israelites could remember not only the salvation from the wilderness out of Egypt, but also the wilderness they had to endure on their journey from Babylon to Jerusalem.


The interesting thing about this passage is that the over hundred thousand people of Israel gathered as “one man”. This shows that even though these Israelites had been scattered in the Babylonian empire and now had returned to Israel after many, many years, they were united in their desire to live out the Law of Moses (verse 2).


These Israelites were united with a purpose and a desire to worship God and to remember how God had restored Israel from the powers of Egypt once before, and how God would continue to be faithful in His promises to Abraham, Jacob, and David. This is how they could gather as if they were one man.


This image of Israel gathering as one man points us forward in history to the Church.


With the Church, we have one man. We have the Body that is composed of all the believers, and we have the Head who is Christ. The Church, as one man, is united with the singular purpose and desire to worship God and remember how God has restored us from the powers of sin, and how God will continue to be faithful in His promises to uphold us and to strengthen us. This is how the Church can gather as if one man in the presence of God.


Just as the Israelites were able to gather with the one desire to worship God through the celebration of His festivals and the rebuilding of His temple, the Church gathers each Lord’s Day to celebrate the work of the cross and the rebuilding of His temple in our hearts.


Often, the world and even the churchgoers think that the purpose of the gathering of the Church is for social reasons or for planning moralistic actions throughout the rest of the days of the week. Although both of these things may happen during a meeting of the saints, they are most certainly not the actual reasons for the Church to gather.


The Church gathers on the Lord’s Day to do none other than worship. The purpose of the Church is to worship and to give praise to God for what He has done and for who He is.


These Israelites from all over the nation of Israel gathered in one location in order to worship the Lord through the provisions of the ceremonies and sacrifices. They gathered to prepare their hearts and their hands for the work of restoring the glory of God to Jerusalem through the building of the temple. Although the feast would have included the company of fellow Israelites and the sharing of delicious food, the Israelites were not gathering for that purpose— they gathered to worship the Lord.


There are a lot of talks about unity in the Church. People love to emphasize the need for ignoring the differences we have with one another to pursue unity above all things. I agree, unity is important, however, we must understand that unity of the Church is not something that we achieve through human compromises and contracts, but as we see here in the passage today, unity is achieved when people come together to worship God. Unity is not something that comes as a result of people seeking unity for unity’s sake, but unity is something that comes naturally when people come together to know God and worship God.


Brothers and sisters, I pray and hope that the Church will be able to see that all that we need in forming a proper Church is found in recognizing God for who He is— that is theology, and in the correct worship of Him.


Consider


1. How have we sought to produce the byproducts of worship more so than worship itself?