Ezra 4:1-3: The Adversaries
July 20, 2020

1 Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the returned exiles were building a temple to the Lord, the God of Israel, 2 they approached Zerubbabel and the heads of fathers' houses and said to them, “Let us build with you, for we worship your God as you do, and we have been sacrificing to him ever since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assyria who brought us here.” 3 But Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the rest of the heads of fathers' houses in Israel said to them, “You have nothing to do with us in building a house to our God; but we alone will build to the Lord, the God of Israel, as King Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Who are these adversaries? Why would the Israelites not allow these men to help them build the temple?

If we look back a couple of books to 2 Kings 17, we are presented with the answer. These adversaries were the people of foreign nations who had been sent by Assyria to resettle the lands of Israel when Israel was exiled in the reign of Hoshea. These non-Israelites came into the land with their own gods and goddesses and worshipped those false idols in place of God. This aroused the anger of the LORD upon these people and the LORD unleashed lions in the midst of these settlers. In fear of the LORD, these people offered sacrifices to the LORD, yet still they refused to turn from their idols. These are the people we come to know as the Samaritans.

The Jews hated the Samaritans. And this hatred was not only because the Samaritans had taken the land that was rightfully theirs— given by God as their promised land, but the Samaritans had even taken their religion and twisted it to fit their needs. The Samaritans imitated the worship of the Israelites except with no blessing from God and no true understanding of God.

Here in our passage today, these Samaritans are those who are called the “adversaries”. They are the adversaries because as we have already discussed, they were not only against God in worship, but they manipulated the concept of the Hebrew God to fit the desires of their hearts. They kept the outside facade and actions of the Jewish worship but utterly ignored the God for whom the worship was dedicated to.

These adversaries are not allowed to help out with the building of the temple of God because if they were to have their hand in the construction of the holy dwelling place of God, the construction would not be holy at all. If those who were not holy, not set apart, were to dwell and become one with Israel to the extent of even building the temple, the most holy place, Israel would no longer be holy but contaminated with the idols of the foreign lands.

You may think that the term “adversary” is much too harsh, but in reality, we must understand that such a term is the only fitting vocabulary we can espouse for such a people. If the simplest of notions that all sinners are the enemies of God is not satisfying enough for the reader (Romans 5:10), we must consider what these adversaries had done to the true faith in Yahweh.

Firstly, we know that in their worship of the other gods, they have broken the first commandment. Secondly, we know that in their improper worship of God, they have broken the second commandment. Thirdly, in their worship of a god completely different from that of the God of Israel and calling their false god as God, they have blasphemed the LORD. All this, and to add, in tomorrow’s passage, we will see that their covetousness (against the ninth commandment) brings hatred against their neighbors. 

To this, one might complain, “but all have sinned!”, and they would be correct. However, one must also realize that there is a special wrath deserved for those who claim to be part of the family of God, but in reality, serve a god of their own composition. Among such people are the deceived— those who think that they are serving the true God, but are misled. However, among them are also the deceivers— those who know what they are saying to be false, but mislead because of the evil in their hearts.

Now, how does this apply to us today? Well, the truth is that these adversaries exist in the Church today. They are often the deceived who are misled by faulty doctrines and a feel-good gospel that does not preach the truth, but a type of consumeristic emotionalism. Though they may not mean to, they may mislead others in their ignorance and their continued sin of not knowing God because they are simply not saved. They are a dime a dozen in the modern church and often attend church services because they have “always done so” or because they want to enjoy the friendships they have within it. There are also the deceivers, the false teachers and disciplers who preach a gospel that exalts their heart above the throne of God. They think themselves to be wise— wiser than God. They ignore the Scriptures and seek God because He provides them with the influence they desire or the self-assurance in their sin or the profit they gain from appealing to the masses.

The question I want to ask you today is: Are you an adversary of God? Have deceived yourself and others into thinking that you are a Christian while inwardly the God you serve is a figment of your inner desires?

The Christian Church is set apart— it is holy. It is different from the world, and the world should be able to see that it is different. Are you daily building up the invisible Kingdom of God in your visible activity as these men of Israel did? Or are you numbered among the adversaries who are slowing down the progress of establishment of Christ’s Kingdom with your false worship?

Consider

1. Are you part of the Church?