Ezra 4:7-16: A False Testimony
July 22, 2020

7 In the days of Artaxerxes, Bishlam and Mithredath and Tabeel and the rest of their associates wrote to Artaxerxes king of Persia. The letter was written in Aramaic and translated. 8 Rehum the commander and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king as follows: 9 Rehum the commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their associates, the judges, the governors, the officials, the Persians, the men of Erech, the Babylonians, the men of Susa, that is, the Elamites, 10 and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Osnappar deported and settled in the cities of Samaria and in the rest of the province Beyond the River. 11 (This is a copy of the letter that they sent.) “To Artaxerxes the king: Your servants, the men of the province Beyond the River, send greeting. And now 12 be it known to the king that the Jews who came up from you to us have gone to Jerusalem. They are rebuilding that rebellious and wicked city. They are finishing the walls and repairing the foundations. 13 Now be it known to the king that if this city is rebuilt and the walls finished, they will not pay tribute, custom, or toll, and the royal revenue will be impaired. 14 Now because we eat the salt of the palace and it is not fitting for us to witness the king's dishonor, therefore we send and inform the king, 15 in order that search may be made in the book of the records of your fathers. You will find in the book of the records and learn that this city is a rebellious city, hurtful to kings and provinces, and that sedition was stirred up in it from of old. That was why this city was laid waste. 16 We make known to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls finished, you will then have no possession in the province Beyond the River.”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we see the false accusations that were brought against the returning exiles before King Artaxerxes. In order to understand this passage, we should understand where these accusations were coming from. 

As we read in the devotionals from Day 120, the adversaries against the Israelites were the Samaritans living in the land. They had been disrupting the building of the temple for many years (from the reign of King Cyrus to the reign of King Artaxerxes), and we see that they now brought a formal accusation against the Israelites. 

The basis of this accusation rests in the fact that Judah had previously rebelled against Babylon under the reigns of King Jehoiakim and King Zedekiah in 2 Kings. The argument of the Samaritans is that the exiles will once again rebel against the Persian king and refuse allegiance if they are allowed to continue to rebuild Jerusalem. 

However, this was a completely false accusation because the exiles were actually obeying the decree of King Cyrus to rebuild the temple as we saw in the first chapter of Ezra. The accusers were mixing truths of the Israelites’ rebellious past with the lie that they now sought to rebel against the Persian Kingdom.

Brothers and sisters, is this not how the great accuser (Revelation 12:10), Satan, accuses us? Rather than using completely baseless accusations, Satan often tries to hold us to our past sins, distort the truth, and drown us in guilt to convince us that we are not/cannot be saved. When we are tempted to succumb to such accusations, let us stand firm in the truth, clinging to our new identity in Christ that is no longer bound by such accusations. 

Furthermore, let us be prepared to face false accusations and testimonies from those around us, just as the exiles did. Let us be prepared to be falsely accused as bigoted, intolerant, and delusional for following our Lord Jesus Christ. And when we are met with such adversity, let us look to the One that was hated first (John 15:18) and cling to His truth even closer. 

Consider

1. Are you prepared and willing to face false accusations for following Christ?