Ezra 1:2-4: Charged to Build His House
July 2, 2020

2 “Thus says Cyrus king of Persia: The Lord, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 3 Whoever is among you of all his people, may his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and rebuild the house of the Lord, the God of Israel—he is the God who is in Jerusalem. 4 And let each survivor, in whatever place he sojourns, be assisted by the men of his place with silver and gold, with goods and with beasts, besides freewill offerings for the house of God that is in Jerusalem.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we see how King Cyrus was used as an instrument of God to rebuild Jerusalem and His temple. We saw yesterday that God “stirred up the spirit of Cyrus” (verse 1) to rebuild the temple of Jerusalem, but we see the extent of Cyrus’s conviction in today’s passage. He did not simply declare that the Jewish people could return to restore Jerusalem, but he gave them many provisions and blessings to do so (verse 4). 

Something to note is that the Bible tells us that Cyrus did not know God (Isaiah 45:4). One takeaway from this is that a foreign king who did not know God obeyed Him more readily than His own people and kings had done. Brothers and sisters, let us always readily obey the Lord and view service to Him as a privilege, knowing that He can very well choose any other instrument to complete His will. 

Another takeaway from this is a reminder of God’s sovereignty. The king of Persia, the great empire of the world at the time, was unable to do anything but bow to the will of the Father though he did not know God. Let us never think that anything is outside the dominion of our Lord, but let us instead pray fervently and boldly that God would advance His kingdom in our hearts and on this earth, trusting that everything is in the Father’s hands.

But something even more important to focus on in this passage is the importance of rebuilding the temple. Note that God did not charge Cyrus with returning the Jews to their land, but rather with rebuilding the temple of God (verse 2).What God made clear by charging Cyrus to rebuild His temple was His intention to dwell among His people once again, just as He had promised. 

Had the Jews simply returned to Jerusalem without God dwelling among them, they would have been like any other nation. The very identity of the Jewish people was the chosen people of God, and though they were not faithful to this identity, God was still faithful and showed this through the rebuilding of His temple. 

Brothers and sisters, let us never forget that our greatest identity, our only identity, is a follower of Christ. We can try to strive after different goals and projects, but such things do not define us and we mustn’t let our lives revolve around them. Rather, let us cling to the God who has given us new lives and has gracefully chosen us as His people, and save in nothing else. 

Consider

1. Let us reflect on the sovereignty of God. Have we forgotten that He is Lord above all? 
2. From where do you find your greatest identity? 