Ephesians 3:2-6: Mystery of Christ Revealed
April 5, 2020

2 assuming that you have heard of the stewardship of God's grace that was given to me for you, 3 how the mystery was made known to me by revelation, as I have written briefly. 4 When you read this, you can perceive my insight into the mystery of Christ, 5 which was not made known to the sons of men in other generations as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit. 6 This mystery is that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


What is this mystery that Paul speaks of?

You see, this is the same Paul who approved of the execution of Stephen (Acts 8:1), and the same Paul who went to the high priest asking for letters to bind the followers of Christ (Acts 9:1-2). He had grown up a Hebrew of Hebrews, and lived his life devout to the Torah — a Pharisee (Philippians 3:4-6). He was the last person imaginable to affirm a new covenant Israel — much less suffer for their sake (verse 1). He was of the “other generations” who did not know the mystery (verse 5).

Yet, when he received through revelation (Galatians 2:2) this mystery of the Gospel that opens the doors for all the nations to become a child of God, he became a prisoner to Christ for the Gentiles. Now, instead of standing opposed to the followers of Jesus who opened arms for Samaritans and Proselytes, Paul stood rebuking Jesus’s own disciples for not being bold enough to accept the Gentiles (Galatians 2:12-14). Once a chief of the persecutors of Christ, now was a mere steward for that same Christ (verse 2).

Oh! The mystery is that all those who were once wild olive shoots became grafted into the olive tree of Jesus Christ to be called His people (Romans 11:17). They did not deserve to be grafted in, nor be given titles as “heirs” (verse 6). It was truly a mystery that all the nations would one day come to call God their own, and for God to call these foreigners His own (Hosea 2:23).

This was what Paul was given stewardship of (verse 2). To him was revealed this mystery (verse 3) of how those who did not have the law, nor the covenant promise given to Abraham, would come to be “fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus” (verse 6).

We cannot take this mystery lightly! For this truth and mystery of the Gospel changed the course of Paul’s life and those of the Ephesians he preached to. How can such a powerful Gospel leave us unmarred and untouched, glued to our seats, and not stirred within our hearts?

Paul himself wants the reader to know the extent to which he is desperate and passionate for this Gospel that extends to the Gentiles beyond the walls of Jerusalem. He cries, “you can perceive my insight into the mystery of Christ” in his writing this letter (verse 4). This insight means the knowledge and wisdom he has been given, but even more than that, he means to convey the extent to which those knowledge and wisdom transforms him to live out that Gospel to the extremes of being beaten, shipwrecked, becoming hungry, and stoned to near death (2 Corinthians 11:23-29). His insight into the mystery of Christ is shown through His dedication to the Ephesians in explaining the Gospel through this very letter.

Paul was the Apostle given such charge over the Gentiles to share the Good News to, but he was certainly not the only saint to be given the charge. We, as Christians who have been called to “make disciples of all nations” must carry on the torch that Paul passed on (Matthew 28:19-20). We are Gentiles like Timothy, Priscilla, and Aquila, but equally a part of New Jerusalem as any of the Old Testament heroes.

During this Passion Week, let us consider what drives us. Is it the same fire that was within Paul? Are we burning to want to share the Gospel truth that Jesus died for us and lived again? We know the mystery of Christ that the world does not know and we know that we are heirs of Christ because of the suffering that Jesus walked through.

Could we be challenged this week, and the weeks to come to share the suffering of Christ and the love that was shown through it — even if it means losing as much as Paul did?

Brothers and sister, “Therefore, let us go to him outside the camp and bear the reproach he endured. For here we have no lasting city, but we seek a city that is to come.” (Hebrews 13:13-14)

Consider

1. For what mission and calling do you live this life? Have you truly dedicated your life to Christ, or is Christ a cherry-on-top?

2. Jesus enters Jerusalem in fanfare this Palm Sunday. None of the worshipers at the gate knew this same Messiah would die a miserable death for their sins. They worshipped Jesus thinking Jesus would bring prosperity and riches, we see that the early Christians worshipped Jesus despite their poverty and persecution. What kind of Jesus do you serve?

3. Prepare your heart and make dedications to the Lord for this Passion Week.