Ezra 8:1-14: Added to Their Number

August 18, 2020

These are the heads of their fathers' houses, and this is the genealogy of those who went up with me from Babylonia, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king: 2 Of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom. Of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel. Of the sons of David, Hattush. 3 Of the sons of Shecaniah, who was of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah, with whom were registered 150 men. 4 Of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him 200 men. 5 Of the sons of Zattu, Shecaniah the son of Jahaziel, and with him 300 men. 6 Of the sons of Adin, Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him 50 men. 7 Of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with him 70 men. 8 Of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah the son of Michael, and with him 80 men. 9 Of the sons of Joab, Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him 218 men. 10 Of the sons of Bani, Shelomith the son of Josiphiah, and with him 160 men. 11 Of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah, the son of Bebai, and with him 28 men. 12 Of the sons of Azgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him 110 men. 13 Of the sons of Adonikam, those who came later, their names being Eliphelet, Jeuel, and Shemaiah, and with them 60 men. 14 Of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zaccur, and with them 70 men.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Yet another genealogy. I will not go into yet another detail about how important genealogies are to the Israelites or about specific people in the list of names (though you may notice that some of the names are familiar).


Instead, today, I just want to focus on the fact that God added to the congregation of the Israelite holy community at Jerusalem— just the simple notion that God did not end the recuperation of the body of the holy community with the initial import of exiles, but that God continued, in droves, the saturation of the holy community in Jerusalem again and again. If we are to look forward to a certain phrase present in the New Testament and use it here to our advantage, God “added to their number”.


God added to the number of the Israelites as He would also add to the numbers of the faithful Christians in the early church. We read in Acts 2:47 the phrase, “added to their number”, and I see it fitting to use it here also to explain how God was increasing the number of worshippers at the second temple in Ezra’s time.


Just as the Church was increased in their number of faithful, the worshippers at the second temple increased in their number. Just as the Church faced many hardships and persecution for their faith, these Israelites also faced many hardships and suffered for their belief in Yahweh.


It is most interesting because both of these communities thrived in times of hardship. They thrived when the only thing they had to hold onto was the hope of God’s promises and the merciful hand of God among unworthy servants.


For both of the holy communities, the adding to the number happened not because of the obvious pleasures of outward thriving or because of the gifts of God that made them rich. Unlike the Persians and the other foreign gods of the regions, the Israelites did not worship so that they could have a good harvest or to have a fertile family. Unlike the Roman conquerors, the early Christians did not worship so that their olive groves would flourish or their businesses would thrive. No, instead, the Israelites and the early Christians worshipped God because they thought Him worthy of praise. They worshipped God for His sake.


In fact, we see in Ezra that these Israelites gave up everything to come to Jerusalem, a desolate land, and they even spent their own money and belongings to construct the temple. We see in Nehemiah, that the Israelites even go so far as to lay out their lives for the construction and redemption of Jerusalem. Similarly, the Christians, as we see in Acts, give up all of their possessions and become martyred for the sake of the Gospel with no second thought to what they may be losing.


How could they do this?


The answer is simple: they were gaining more than they were losing. Or rather, a more proper way saying this would be that they had already gained more than they were losing. For both the Israelites and the early Christians, they were gaining God while losing the things of this world. And it was this faithful worship through the sacrifices of themselves that blessed God to add to that number of faithfuls.


We talk of revivals a lot. We talk about how we need God to bring people to Christ and how we need a mass exodus of people from the worldly culture into the church. However, we must understand how we are to do such a thing. We need to understand that revival does not come about through a church’s outreach event or new basketball court. It does not come about through a church’s new stage or worship team. It does not come about through a church’s extravagant plays or wonderful food.


It only comes about when the Church worships God to the point of self-sacrifice. It comes about when the Church dies as Christ died so that greater fruits may be produced in their loss of the temporal in gaining the eternal. Only God brings people to Christ and brings revival, and God will surely remember the hearts of those who seek the Kingdom!


This is a call for proper worship. This is a call for preachers who preach the offensive Gospel as Peter preached it to the three thousands souls who were added to their number. This is a call for builders who would give up all if for one second of genuine worship as Zerubabbel did.



Consider


1. Are you attracted to Christianity because of God or because of the things of God?

2. Is your attraction and preaching of the Gospel based on the things you can get from God or things you get to give back to God?