Ezra 8:21-23: Fasting for the the Pride of the LORD

August 20, 2020


21 Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might humble ourselves before our God, to seek from him a safe journey for ourselves, our children, and all our goods. 22 For I was ashamed to ask the king for a band of soldiers and horsemen to protect us against the enemy on our way, since we had told the king, “The hand of our God is for good on all who seek him, and the power of his wrath is against all who forsake him.” 23 So we fasted and implored our God for this, and he listened to our entreaty.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today we read about the fasting and prayer of Ezra and the Levites prior to their journey.


Looking at verse 21, we can better understand the motivation behind Ezra’s call to fast and pray: “a safe journey for ourselves, our children, and all our goods.” To Ezra, the fear of being attacked and also robbed was a legitimate and plausible fear. 


To start, the journey from Babylon to Jerusalem spanned 900 miles or 1,448 km. Furthermore, the group that traveled with Ezra included both children and elderly people. So travelling with such a numbered group over a long distance with precious goods and very weak fighting power if attacked would probably cause anyone to fear for their safety.


While clearly a real dilemma for Ezra, his response to it is a great example for Christians. We see this both at the very start and end of the reading for today, “Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might humble ourselves before our God,” “So we fasted and implored our God for this, and he listened to our entreaty.”


While one might conclude that this action to fast and pray to God resulted in their safe journey hence we should also fast and pray whenever we need something, the message and significance is actually much greater than the materialistic mindset of doing an action in order to receive something.


To properly understand this message, we must look back at scripture to the middle part of verse 21, “that we might humble ourselves before our God.” Similar to prayer, fasting is an action of surrender before God, indicating that He is so much greater than even food. Prayer follows the same line of reasoning as an action earnestly humbling ourselves before God to show how we are weak and in need of God.


Ezra through this action puts his concerns over himself, the people with him, and their goods into God’s hands, trusting in his sovereign power and will. Looking at the next verse, we grasp more of the significance behind this action, “For I was ashamed to ask the king for a band of soldiers and horsemen to protect us against the enemy on our way, since we had told the king, ‘The hand of our God is for good on all who seek him, and the power of his wrath is against all who forsake him.’”


While to many it was clearly the smarter and more advantageous decision to receive the protection of the king during the journey, in this case their trust in worldly protection would actually undermine God’s power to protect them. They already told the king about God's power to protect those who seek him, but if they still are fearful and seek the king for protection, God is then portrayed as a weak and incapable deity.


However, we must be very discerning. This does not mean we should just mindlessly reject any convenient or advantageous opportunity from the world. We should first and foremost seek God and ask him for wisdom, which may be to use the opportunities we were given. However in this case if Ezra chose to trust in the king’s protection rather than God’s protection, it could have been a stumbling block to those around him and also a dishonoring of God’s name.


Regardless of the situation, as Christians we should always live our lives wholeheartedly trusting in God. Another example of this complete trust in God can be seen in Daniel 3:17-18 through Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, “‘If this be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of your hand, O king. But if not, be it known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the golden image that you have set up.”


Even today when we face challenges not relating to worldly things but with our faith, the mindset we maintain should be that God is able to deliver us, he will deliver us, and even if he does not deliver us we will not serve other gods but Him who is good.


Consider

1. How has fasting played a role in your spiritual life?

2. In what ways have you put your trust in God?