Ephesians 2:11-12: Apart From God
April 1, 2020 

11 Therefore remember that at one time you Gentiles in the flesh, called “the uncircumcision” by what is called the circumcision, which is made in the flesh by hands— 12 remember that you were at that time separated from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. 

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

We hear of many great testimonies in Christianity — conversion stories out of drugs, lives of crime completely abandoned, etc. But when we look at how God has worked in our own lives, it is easy to think that there is nothing particularly extraordinary, at least not compared to those testimonies.
 
However, that is not how Paul sees it and nor should we. In this passage, Paul reminds the Gentiles of their lives before they knew Jesus Christ, and he makes it clear that they had no hope of salvation beforehand. In fact, Paul writes of two distinctions that the Gentiles had before they were believers:
 
(1) Social Distinction: Paul writes in verse 11 to those who are called the “uncircumcision” (the Gentiles) by the “circumcision” (the Jews). By using these terms, the Jews were emphasizing that the Gentiles had no share in the covenant of God, since circumcision was the mark of the Abrahamic covenant. And yet, the Gentiles who were once outcasts to the people of God now have no distinction in Christ.
 
(2) Spiritual Distinction: This is the main idea of the passage. Paul starts verse 12 with the fact that the Gentiles “were at that time separated from Christ,” and explains the implications of this:
 
First off, they were “alienated from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the covenants of the promise.” Paul is again emphasizing that the Gentiles had no share in the promises of God. It is not just that they did not receive the inheritance of the Jewish people, but also that the Gentiles were left with the inheritance of the world, which is sin and death.
 
More importantly, the Gentiles had “no hope” and were “without God in the world.” We must read these as consequences of being “separated from Christ.” Therefore, Paul is making it clear that without Jesus, there is no hope in this life (as we are “without God”) nor in the life to come.
 
Brothers and sisters, let us realize the depths from which God has saved us and not forget it. In doing so, we can praise God all the more for the works He has done in our lives, and we can excitedly share of the great hope that is only found in Jesus.
 
Consider
 
1. Take some time to thank God for what He has done and for the hope we have in Him.  
 
2. What is your testimony?