Ezra 8:31-36: Not a Piece of Offering Touched

August 22, 2020


31 Then we departed from the river Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go to Jerusalem. The hand of our God was on us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy and from ambushes by the way. 32 We came to Jerusalem, and there we remained three days. 33 On the fourth day, within the house of our God, the silver and the gold and the vessels were weighed into the hands of Meremoth the priest, son of Uriah, and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas, and with them were the Levites, Jozabad the son of Jeshua and Noadiah the son of Binnui. 34 The whole was counted and weighed, and the weight of everything was recorded.

35 At that time those who had come from captivity, the returned exiles, offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bulls for all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, and as a sin offering twelve male goats. All this was a burnt offering to the Lord. 36 They also delivered the king's commissions to the king's satraps and to the governors of the province Beyond the River, and they aided the people and the house of God.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In yesterday’s devotional, we saw how the priests were tasked with carrying a large sum of wealth to the temple in Jerusalem. This was not just a random lot of riches, but it was to be used as an offering to the Lord. 


In today’s passage, we see that the priests make it safely to Jerusalem because the “hand of God was upon [them]” (verse 31). In other words, it was not just by luck or coincidence that the priests arrived at Jerusalem safely. Rather, God was actively protecting the priests and the offering for the entire trip. 


In fact, the priests would have been quite an easy and attractive target for any group of robbers along the way. The amount of wealth and riches that the priests were transporting would not have been easy to hide but rather quite visible. Therefore, it was almost strange that the priests were not robbed along the way. However, the priests knew that it was not simply by a strange stroke of luck that their journey was safe, but rather it was by the hand of God. 


Brothers and sisters, do we have the same dependence on God? Do we pray to God for his blessing and wisdom in every area of our lives, or do we simply turn to Him when things go wrong? Do we leave things up to our luck or our own skills, or do we rather pray to Him first in every situation?


This morning, let us all come before God and confess that we need Him. Let us pray for HIs hand upon us and that He would guide us and lead us. 




Consider


1. Do you truly depend upon the Lord?