Ezra 7:15-20: A Diligent Freewill Offering

August 14, 2020


15 and also to carry the silver and gold that the king and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose dwelling is in Jerusalem, 16 with all the silver and gold that you shall find in the whole province of Babylonia, and with the freewill offerings of the people and the priests, vowed willingly for the house of their God that is in Jerusalem. 17 With this money, then, you shall with all diligence buy bulls, rams, and lambs, with their grain offerings and their drink offerings, and you shall offer them on the altar of the house of your God that is in Jerusalem. 18 Whatever seems good to you and your brothers to do with the rest of the silver and gold, you may do, according to the will of your God. 19 The vessels that have been given you for the service of the house of your God, you shall deliver before the God of Jerusalem. 20 And whatever else is required for the house of your God, which it falls to you to provide, you may provide it out of the king's treasury.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today, we see the generous provision of King Artaxerxes to Ezra and the Israelites. He gave Ezra money out of his own treasury (verse 20) to buy “bulls, rams, and lambs” (verse 17) in order to sacrifice to the Lord. Furthermore, he gave even more silver and gold to Ezra for anything else the Israelites needed. 


As we have seen throughout our reading of Ezra, this was all a result of God’s sovereign providence. While Artaxerxes was the one who physically gave Ezra such provisions, it was God that worked through the heart of Artaxerxes to do so. However, the focus of today’s devotional is not this divine providence, as we have already covered this multiple times. The focus of today’s devotional is our own heart of sacrifice to the Lord. 


The heathen king of Persia, Artaxerxes, offered more to the Lord and his temple than many kings of Judah had done. The kings of Judah often impoverished the temple of God in order to build up wealth for themselves, but this heathen king offered far more than what was required of him. 


Brothers and sisters, are we not often like these wicked kings of Judah? Though we call ourselves the people of God, do we not often withhold sacrifices to the Lord? We often withhold our time, our money, and our devotion to the True and Living God, though we claim to worship Him. On the other hand, we see in today’s passage that King Artaxerxes, who did not know God, still gave offerings to the Lord, at his own expense. This offering from a heathen king serves to condemn us, the ones who claim to love and serve the Lord but at the same time withhold our offerings. 


Let those of us who claim to love and serve the Lord truly demonstrate it through our lives. And we demonstrate this by the way that we use our time, our money, etc. Let us not be like the wicked kings of Judah, shamed by this offering from a foreign king. Instead, let us give all that we have to the Lord, for we are His people and He is our God.  



Consider


1. Do you withhold any offerings to God? Are you truly devoting your time, your energy, your life to Him?