Ezra 7:1-6: A Zealous Priesthood

August 11, 2020


Now after this, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of Hilkiah, 2 son of Shallum, son of Zadok, son of Ahitub, 3 son of Amariah, son of Azariah, son of Meraioth, 4 son of Zerahiah, son of Uzzi, son of Bukki, 5 son of Abishua, son of Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the chief priest— 6 this Ezra went up from Babylonia. He was a scribe skilled in the Law of Moses that the Lord, the God of Israel, had given, and the king granted him all that he asked, for the hand of the Lord his God was on him.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In today’s passage, we see yet another list of names. The book of Ezra is full of these lists of names as we have already been made aware, and each of these lists testify of a certain aspect of Israel in their status as a chosen people.


In today’s passage, the list of names is in the form of a genealogy and is particularly one that is in reverse-chronological order. The name starts with Ezra and goes all the way back to Aaron, the first priest, the brother of Moses.


Going through the names, we run into a couple famous men of the Bible. Reading in the order as presented in the text, we run into the familiar name of Hilkiah. Hilkiah, as we see in 2 Kings 22:8, was the one who found the Book of the Law in the temple during Josiah’s renovations of the temple. This led to the great reform of Israel back to right worship of the LORD.


Next, going a little further, we run into yet another familiar name, Zadok. Zadok was the name of the priest who helped David when David had been dethroned by his own son Absalom. Zadok was faithful to the true king of Israel that God had anointed and refused to compromise and serve the one who usurped the righteous king.


Skipping a couple more names, we see the name Phinehas. One of my personal favorites, Phinehas was the man who struck the Israelite man fornicating with a foreign woman in Numbers 25 to plead for the LORD to remove His wrath against Israel for their idolatry and worship of other gods. His zeal ensured that his line would be a line of priests.


His father, Eleazar, was the priest who survived the two irreverent sons of Aaron who were killed for offering strange fires to the LORD. Eleazar had remained holy unlike his brothers in his worship to the LORD, and upon seeing the wrath of God play out against his own brothers, he was most assuredly fearful of the holiness of God during his service.


Finally, we arrive at Aaron, the original high priest. He was the first of the chosen of the Levites who took on the heavy duty of offering sacrifices unto the LORD. He was chosen out of God’s sovereign will to be the priest— not because he was any better than others, but because God willed it.


From all these names, we are shown what heritage Ezra received and what he was expected to live out in his ministry. Ezra is most well known as a scribe, but he was also a priest. He had expectations and duties set upon him from none other than the LORD. Like Hilkiah, Ezra was to teach and reform. Like Zadok, he was to be ever faithful to the King. Like Phinehas, he was to be zealous for the LORD. Like Eleazar, he was to remain holy before the LORD. Like Aaron, he was chosen by the LORD.


Yet, how was he to accomplish all this?


Ezra would do it in the same way all the other priests had learned to do it: through “the Law of Moses that the LORD, the God of Israel, had given” (verse 6). Though Ezra had been far away in the land of the exiles, God had given Ezra enough to be informed and faithful to Himself. God had given Ezra the Law. This Law would allow Ezra to be a faithful keeper of the line of zealous priests who desired to serve and love the LORD with all their lives.


We, the Church, are also called to a greater priesthood. The Church is a royal priesthood (1 Peter 2:9). A people called to serve the LORD with an even greater might and love than what the Israelites could muster up. Like Hilkiah we must teach and reform. Like Zadok, we must be faithful to our King Jesus. Like Phinehas, we are to be burning with zeal for the LORD. Like Eleazar, we are to offer sacrifices of our lives that are a holy worship to God (Romans 12:1). Like Aaron, we have been chosen to be His servants since before even time began.


And just like these Old Testament priests, we can do all this by the faithful reading and learning of the Word of God just as Ezra so faithfully studied the Word of God in his exilic days. We, the exiles of this fallen world, must also study the Word to be faithful servants to God.


Consider


1. How does your reading of the Bible inform your sacrificial worship to the LORD?