Ezra 3:10-11: Steadfast Love Endures Forever 
July 18, 2020

10 And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, the priests in their vestments came forward with trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with cymbals, to praise the Lord, according to the directions of David king of Israel. 11 And they sang responsively, praising and giving thanks to the Lord,

“For he is good,
    for his steadfast love endures forever toward Israel.”

And all the people shouted with a great shout when they praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the Lord was laid.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


What a joyous occasion! We see in verse 10 that the foundations of the temple of the Lord had been laid! Though there is no ark nor temple yet, this was still a beginning worth celebrating. Imagine the praises of Israel as the priests came forth with trumpets and the Levites with cymbals. We see in this passage a great example of corporate worship. For in their worship, Israel was responding to the covenantal love of the Lord. Though they deserved their affliction, God was merciful enough to give them yet another chance after seventy years of His wise discipline. Brothers and sisters, there is nothing inherently wrong with skilled musicians and praising with emotions and a “great shout”. So long as our praise is rooted in awesome God-centered truths, let our praises be passionate and expressive! 

In verse 11 we see that the people of God sang Psalms 118 responsively, shouting, “his steadfast love endures forever towards Israel”. Generation after generation, we see that the steadfast love of the Lord has endured. So often we worship individualistically, only remembering the ways in which God had delivered us despite our rebellion. But let us also remember the Love of God displayed so powerfully throughout the history written in Scripture. Again and again, His people had turned away from Him, yet God’s Love was steadfast and unconditional. Even while Israel was drenched in the stench of idol worship and boasting in their sins, God chose to save those whom he had predestined for adoption through the Gospel which had yet to come. 

Remember, these Israelites did not even know the full Gospel - how much more should we who know it worship in response to God’s Love! Brothers and sisters, do we have a ceaseless attitude of worship? If we set our minds on ourselves or the things of this world, we may very well end up grumbling. Think about these Israelites. When Jerusalem fell, they lost their loved ones and all of their possessions, only to spend seventy years in captivity. Would you have grumbled in bitterness under these circumstances? Yet these Israelites understood Psalms 119:67: Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep your word. 

Because God stirred in their hearts, these Israelites recognized that even their ability to live was worth praising God for. Because they understood who they were and what they deserved, they could sing with a spirit of praise. Because God did not turn away from His people but allowed them to rebuild the temple, they shouted that God’s steadfast love endures forever.

Brothers and sisters, there is never a reason to grumble, but there is always a reason to praise God for his Love. In this passage, the temple was by no means complete. Only the foundation was laid. Yet this did not prevent God’s people from joyfully singing in praise. Let us also joyfully build up the Church, praising God every step of the way. 

Consider

1. What causes you to praise God? Do you ever forget to praise God simply for who He is? Spend some time and praise Him for things you may have overlooked.
2. How is praise and service related? What does that look like in your life? 