Ephesians 3:14-16: Strength in His Spirit
April 8, 2020

14 For this reason I bow my knees before the Father, 15 from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named, 16 that according to the riches of his glory he may grant you to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in your inner being,


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Here, Paul prays for the second time in this book. The first time he prayed was in Ephesians 1:15-23, and that was for enlightenment of the hope and inheritance that we have in Christ. This time, he is praying for enablement because of what we have in Christ. 

Herein lies something very important for all of us to realize. We can have the “enlightenment and head knowledge” of the Gospel. We can know all of the miraculous things that Jesus has done for us, and we can know all the theological terms and the right things to say. But that is all meaningless on its own. We must also be strengthened by Him for His great purposes, just as Paul says in verse 16. 

Imagine that you have a beautiful Lamborghini worth millions of dollars that is sure to make heads turn. But for whatever reason, you don’t drive the car. In fact, you keep it in your garage and don’t even speak of the car, let alone drive it. I think that you and I can agree that this would be foolish and almost wasteful. And yet, this is essentially what we do when we know the Gospel but refuse to have it empower and change our lives. 

Now, let us move to a closer look at the text. In verse 14, Paul says “for this reason, I bow my knees before the Father.” For what reason? This verse is actually a continuation of verse 1, as verses 2-13 are like a big parentheses of additional information. And the reason that verse 1 points to is found in the last verse of Chapter 2: “In Him you are also being built together into a dwelling place for God by the Spirit.” Paul is praying that the Holy Spirit that is given to us would strengthen us.

It is also interesting to note that Paul bows his knee “before the Father.” The word Father conveys intimacy, underlining the reconciliation with God that Paul explained just earlier. 

And because Paul knows of the relationship that we now enjoy with God the Father through Christ, he boldly prays for our empowerment by the Spirit. Let us have this same boldness in prayer when we intercede for ourselves and others, not relying on our own merit or goodness, but rather appealing to “the riches of His glory.”

One final thing to draw attention to is that Paul prays that we would be strengthened in our “inner being.” Our inner being is our soul, it is the essence of who we are. Knowing this, let us evaluate the following statement: “God has strengthened my inner being and the essence of who I am through His Spirit, but there is no change in my life.” Brothers and sisters, this is an absurd and stupid thing to say. May our lives not echo this statement. 

Consider
1. Do we boldly come before the Father when we intercede for ourselves and for others? 
2. Do we live as those who have been strengthened through His Spirit?