Ephesians 3:11-13: Boldness in Christ
April 7, 2020

11 This was according to the eternal purpose that he has realized in Christ Jesus our Lord, 12 in whom we have boldness and access with confidence through our faith in him. 13 So I ask you not to lose heart over what I am suffering for you, which is your glory.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



By “This” in verse 11, Paul is talking about how Paul has been made minister over the Gentiles with the Gospel given to Paul through the grace of God. He claims here that the Gospel going out to all the nations through Paul has been “according to the eternal purpose” of God. We are talking about the entirety of God’s plan from His creation of mankind to the day when Jesus will finally come back, and beyond — all of it was according to the purpose of God. Even from the choosing of Israel to the destruction of the temple, God had planned it all to the point of finally truly allowing all of the nations to become under God’s one sovereign rule.

Furthermore, Paul says this “eternal purpose” was “realized in Christ Jesus our Lord” (verse 11). The word for “realized” in a more direct definition means “accomplished” or “made.” God the Father had created all the world and had chosen the elect to give the Church as a bride to the Son, and when Jesus said, “It is finished” (John 19:30), He had accomplished the eternal purpose of the Father in creating this world. We see that the Father gave, and the Son paid the bride-price for His beloved bride, the Church.

What does this mean for the Church? Paul answers it in verse 12; it means that “we have boldness and access with confidence” — boldness and access? For what? To what?

We have the boldness for our position as children of God (Ephesians 3:6), and we have access to the Father who holds all things in His hands. We can approach the Father in prayer (which Paul does in the next couple verses) for we are children and heirs who have been given the authority and privilege to approach the God of the universe with confidence. The image is that of a child running to the Father whose arms are open wide — the most powerful ruler of the universe gets down on His knee to lift His children up and looks upon His children with joy and favor. What an amazing truth!

All this, not because we deserved it, but because Christ accomplished our adoption for us (Romans 8:15-17; Ephesians 1:5). We have been adopted — welcomed as sons and daughters because Christ has prepared a room in the Father’s house for us (John 14:2). As legitimized sons and daughters of the God Most High, we have no fear in death or guilt in life as the song “In Christ Alone” goes. You see, we have no fear of the devil who has no hold on us, and we have only love from the Father who holds the control over both our body and soul (Matthew 10:28).

This security in the Father, through Christ, is why Paul can ask the Ephesians to not lose heart over how Paul is suffering for them (verse 13). Paul does not lose heart though he may suffer shipwrecks or beatings or imprisonment not because he has the assurance that he will get the end result that his own heart desires in any difficult situation that he encounters, but rather because he knows that He has the Father who will always give him what he needs — whether that be more suffering or rest from a weary journey. He has this guarantee in the scars of Jesus from those nails and the Spirit that is within him (Ephesians 1:13).

Therefore, we, the Church, do not lose heart in the struggles of this life — especially when we are persecuted for our faith. Rather, we look to the Father who gives us only good things (Matthew 11:17) for He is preparing us through the gift of that suffering to become more aware of what we have in Christ and how much greater that is in comparison to what this world can offer us.

This Passion Week, it is quite unfortunate that we are not able to gather as one physical body to worship together, to read the Word together, and to reflect on the journey of Christ to the cross together. However, even in this pandemic outbreak, let us remember that this, even this, is preparing for us to know how much we already are given by the Father who loves us (more than any of even our loving parents can love us) in Christ who suffered for us and sympathizes with us.

Consider

1. It’s sometimes hard to remember that God is our Father. How can we have more confidence in our faith knowing this truth?

2. Our confidence in our faith is shown through our actions that result from the confidence. How can we show our confidence in the Lord in our life in this pandemic?