Ezra 5:9-11: Decreed By God of Heaven and Earth
July 29, 2020

9 Then we asked those elders and spoke to them thus: ‘Who gave you a decree to build this house and to finish this structure?’ 10 We also asked them their names, for your information, that we might write down the names of their leaders. 11 And this was their reply to us: ‘We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and we are rebuilding the house that was built many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

In today’s passage, we continue through the account of the temple-rebuilding, which was written by the governor of the land. Specifically, we see the Israelites being questioned about the source of their authority, and we see their faithful response. 

The questioning of the Israelites’ authority is seen in verse 9, in which the Persian officials demand to know who decreed the rebuilding of the temple. They were essentially asking: “who told you that you could do this?” 

This is a question seen throughout the Bible towards the people of God, and one that we should expect in our own lives. Jesus Himself was asked this question by the Pharisees in Luke 20:2. When we boldly proclaim the Gospel and serve the Lord faithfully, we will surely run into those that question the source of our authority. When this happens, let us take heart that we are being asked the same question that Christians have been asked throughout time, and let us have the same response as the Israelites did in verse 11. 

The Israelites respond that they are “servants of the God of heaven and earth.” In other words, they are under the authority of God Himself, who is above all else. The Israelites knew who it was that they were serving, and this is what allowed them to remain faithful to God’s calling. They knew it was not for their own namesake, their own glory, or their own benefit that they were rebuilding the temple. Rather, it was for the God of heaven and earth, the Lord of Lords, that they were doing so. What authority could be higher? 

Brothers and sisters, we too must remind ourselves daily who it is that we serve. In the words of Joshua, “choose today whom you will serve” (Joshua 24:14). Do we serve man, or do we serve the God of heaven and earth as the Israelites declared in today’s passage? 

If we say that we serve the God of heaven and earth, let our lives reflect it. Let us not cower from what God has called us to, scared of being mocked and questioned by the world. Rather, let us march boldly onwards in service to our God, for we serve the God who is Lord over all. 

Consider

1. Choose today whom you will serve: God or man. 
2. Does your life reflect that you serve the God of heaven and earth? 