Ezra 6:13-18: The Dedication of the Temple

August 9, 2020

13 Then, according to the word sent by Darius the king, Tattenai, the governor of the province Beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and their associates did with all diligence what Darius the king had ordered. 14 And the elders of the Jews built and prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. They finished their building by decree of the God of Israel and by decree of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes king of Persia; 15 and this house was finished on the third day of the month of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.

16 And the people of Israel, the priests and the Levites, and the rest of the returned exiles, celebrated the dedication of this house of God with joy. 17 They offered at the dedication of this house of God 100 bulls, 200 rams, 400 lambs, and as a sin offering for all Israel 12 male goats, according to the number of the tribes of Israel. 18 And they set the priests in their divisions and the Levites in their divisions, for the service of God at Jerusalem, as it is written in the Book of Moses.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today we read about the completion of the temple reconstruction. God had orchestrated this plan from the beginning and has faithfully led the Israelites every step of the way. It was God who first stirred in the heart of King Cyrus to end the 70 years of Babylonian captivity. It was God who then stirred in the heart of Zerubbabel to lead the heads of the fathers’ houses back home. Throughout the risky journey back, God protected His people and strengthened them with faith. After returning, God provided His people with the wisdom necessary to rebuild a temple many of them have not seen before. During the temple construction, God filled them with a spirit of praise and thanksgiving so that they would know the joy of serving Him. When the world fought against His people, God sent prophets to encourage them with His Word. Though Artaxerxes temporarily halted the construction, it led to ministry of Haggai and Zechariah, which also caused Tattenai to write to Darius, which led Darius to support God’s people with even more protection and provision than before.


The book of Ezra has made it abundantly clear: all credit belongs to the Lord. Had God not been carrying all along, His people would have been powerless or perhaps even dead. There would be no temple. By themselves, these people were cowardly, uneducated, weak, and despairing. But He chose these people nonetheless, showing us that anything we accomplish is not through our ability, but His.


As we read verses 13-18, we are reminded of how exactly God’s temple was rebuilt. This should teach us Christians as we participate in building the Church.


The temple was built through God’s sovereignty - In this truth we find great hope. As we have discussed, it is God who does all the work, and we as Chrstians have the glorious privilege of tagging along. Nothing can possibly stop the Church from being finished - no earthly kingdom can thwart us. We see in verse 13 that God even uses those who are against him to carry out his will. It says in verse 13 that “Tattenai, the governor of the province Beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and their associates did with all diligence what Darius the king had ordered.” Moreover, verse 14 tells us that the temple was finished by the “decree of the God of Israel and by decree of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes king of Persia”. Every decree of every worldly King ended up being used by God for His Glory. Truly, as it says in Proverbs, “The king's heart is a stream of water in the hand of the Lord; he turns it wherever he will” (Pr. 21:1). 


The temple was built through God’s Word - Verse 14 tells us the secret of how the elders of the Jews “built and prospered”. It was “through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo”. What empowered the people as they worked was the Word of God speaking to them. If the Israelites were so encouraged by the words of God’s prophets, how much more should we be encouraged by the Word of God himself? Hebrews tells us that “long ago, at many times and in many ways, God spoke to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world” (Heb. 1:1-2). Do not forget that Scripture is more than a mere book, it is God speaking directly to you. We find our source of strength from God’s Word, and we cannot do anything for the Church unless we abide in it!


The temple was built through the gift of faith - Verse 15 shows that the temple was finished “in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king”. In other words, it still took another four years before the temple was fully restored. God gave His people the faith to persevere through years of diligent work and toil. After everything was completed, we see in verses 16-17 that the people came together and offered a sin offering. By immediately performing a sin offering, we see that these people recognized that they had sinned gravely and looked to God as their only hope for atonement. Brothers and sisters, this is faith! For these saints of old, the Law was the Gospel. These people understood that they had failed God miserably and deserved nothing but his wrath, yet instead of wallowing in despair, they placed their faith in the atonement that was available for them through the law. Though they did not fully understand that the object of their faith was Christ, they nonetheless repented, returned to the Lord, and sought to walk “as it is written in the Book of Moses”. Through their faith in Christ, we see in verse 16 that these people were filled with joy as they “celebrated the dedication of this house”. Not only did they act in outward obedience, but these exiles showed a heart of worship. When the original Solomonic temple was completed, a total of 142,000 animals were sacrificed. In comparison, the exiles could only muster up 712 animals because their possessions were few. Nevertheless, what matters was their faithful, sacrificial hearts; “for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart” (1 Sam. 16:7). 


Brothers and sisters, we hope that you are encouraged by God’s sovereignty on this Lord’s day. We are praying that God will use you and the rest of His body of believers to faithfully build up His Church for His glory!


Consider


1. In what ways have you witnessed God’s sovereignty work powerfully in building up His Church?