Ezra 6:8-10: Unexpected Help from Potential Harm

August 6, 2020

8 Moreover, I make a decree regarding what you shall do for these elders of the Jews for the rebuilding of this house of God. The cost is to be paid to these men in full and without delay from the royal revenue, the tribute of the province from Beyond the River. 9 And whatever is needed—bulls, rams, or sheep for burnt offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, or oil, as the priests at Jerusalem require—let that be given to them day by day without fail, 10 that they may offer pleasing sacrifices to the God of heaven and pray for the life of the king and his sons.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In today’s passage, we read something quite surprising: not only did King Darius allow the Israelites to continue rebuilding the temple, but he also ordered that it be royally funded by the local taxes from the province. The Israelites were to be given whatever they needed, “bulls, rams, or sheep” and “wheat, salt wine, or oil” (verse 9), in order to rebuild the temple and worship the Lord. 


This was indeed far more than the Israelites could have expected. Though they only hoped that they would be allowed to continue rebuilding, they were now royally protected and royally funded. Strangely enough, the adversity that the Israelites met while rebuilding the temple actually helped the Israelite cause. That is, the attempt to make an official complaint/warning against the Israelites to King Darius actually helped them rebuild the temple because of the royal support they subsequently received. 


All of this highlights the biblical truth found in Romans 8:28: “And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose.” Not only was God graciously providing for the Israelites through King Darius, but He used the hardship and adversity the Israelites faced to actually advance and help the rebuilding efforts. 


What a great God we serve, that even the evil in this world must submit to God’s great purposes! Brothers and sisters, whenever we face trials and hardships, let us cling to this truth. Our God is the One who used the evil of Joseph’s brothers (when they sold him into slavery) in order to save an entire people. Our God is the One who used the evil of those who crucified His Son upon a cross in order to save all that would believe in Him. 


Brothers and sisters, let us therefore take heart whenever we face trials and hardships. When we are tempted to look at the trials in our own lives or the situation with the global pandemic and think that it is all meaningless, let us remember who our God is. Our God is Lord over all, and uses all things for the good of those who trust in Him. 


However, it may be difficult to see the “good” when we are in the midst of hardship. In fact, all we may know is bitterness, frustration, and confusion when we are met with such trials. When that happens, let us simply confess our trust in the Lord, that we know He is working though we cannot see it, as He has shown us throughout His Word and throughout our lives. 

Consider


1. Do you truly believe that God intends all things for good for those who love Him? 

2. What is your attitude towards trials and hardships? 