Ezra 9:3-5: A Repentant Posture

August 24, 2020

3 As soon as I heard this, I tore my garment and my cloak and pulled hair from my head and beard and sat appalled. 4 Then all who trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the faithlessness of the returned exiles, gathered around me while I sat appalled until the evening sacrifice. 5 And at the evening sacrifice I rose from my fasting, with my garment and my cloak torn, and fell upon my knees and spread out my hands to the Lord my God,

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Today we read about Ezra’s reaction toward the sin of Israel. We have seen how God had set it upon Ezra’s heart to study and teach the law of God. Then, in chapter 8, Ezra assembled a group of willing men and journeyed back to his homeland. What did Ezra find upon his arrival?


Immediately, Ezra hears about how God’s holy race has been mixed with people from foreign lands. In fact, even the leaders - the Levites and rules - had taken Pagan wives. In verse 1, Ezra writes “As soon as I heard this, I tore my garment and my cloak and pulled hair from my head and beard and sat appalled”. Such news was unbelievable! Immediately, Ezra tore his clothes and, more than that, pulled out hair in frustration. The Bible tells us he sat appalled, meaning that he was astonished by Israel’s disobedience. In fact, he sat in this astonishment for hours until evening. 


Brothers and sisters, what do you make of this? Or how would you react if someone in from church was so desperately grieved by sin? Some of us may think he is a bit too carried away - too extreme of a Christian. Others may go as far as to ridicule him for being judgemental. After all, Ezra was a sinner too; what gives him the right to act so radically over the sin of others? These people would label Ezra as intolerant. There may also be people who attempt to comfort Ezra so that he may feel “at peace” about the situation at hand. They may point to the fact that these foreigners were in fact committed to follow God - their harmless presence might even build bridges to the rest of the world!


So how should we react to such a scene? Verse 4 gives us a good idea. Ezra writes, “then all who trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the faithlessness of the returned exiles, gathered around me while I sat appalled until the evening sacrifice.” First, we must recognize that Ezra’s reaction is a godly one. We can learn a lot about a person based on how they react to sin. Most of us simply do not abhor sin enough; we have become desensitized to it and sometimes we even justify it. Sure, prayer comes in many forms, but how often do come before the Lord on our knees? What many Israelites saw in Ezra is a glimpse of the dreadful judgement which awaited them and the grievousness of their sin. Ezra was not crazy, but rather, he was the only one rooted in the reality of the situation at hand. Recognizing this, the other Israelites joined Ezra in repentance and mourning.


Brothers and sisters, this is how we ought to react as well. It was probably a surprise to many of the Israelites to see Ezra like this right after being welcomed home. What was so different about Ezra that his emotions were stirred like so? Well, Scripture tells us what separated Ezra was that he had a deep, God-given understanding of God’s word. After all, his writing is a part of our divinely-inspired Scripture. Because Ezra understood the Word of God, he had a deeper, supernatural understanding of God’s holiness and man’s sinfulness. While other Israelites brushed aside worries about intermarriage, Ezra saw it as a blazing fire of syncretism burning down the Holy kingdom of God.


Let these verses teach us about what a repentant posture looks like. Ezra responded with mourning, fasting, and prayer. In verse 5, Ezra says “I rose from my fasting, with my garment and my cloak torn, and fell upon my knees and spread out my hands to the Lord my God”. Picture for a moment what this looks like. Fully surrendered and pleading with all his might, Ezra prayed to God like a beggar!


O beware of the danger of living so composed, collected, and unfazed! At times, it is an advantage to be in control, but at times, it is foolishness in the eyes of God. As Jonathan Edwards preached, “true religion, in great part, consists in holy affections”. Yet, we live so comfortably and so far from the heart of God.


Not only must we fight against our sinfulness, but we must also learn to be convicted by just how wretched it is. Only then will we understand the sweetness of the fruit of joy that results from the Gospel of Christ. As Christ himself promised, “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted” (Matt. 5:3-4).


We pray that you will not fall asleep to Satan’s lullaby of complacency. God, give us the power to repent as we ought and the strength to know Christ as our infinite treasure!


Consider


1. When is the last time you repented? Have you become indifferent over sin?