Ezra 5:16-17: Faithfulness and Confidence of Sheshbazzar
August 1, 2020

16 Then this Sheshbazzar came and laid the foundations of the house of God that is in Jerusalem, and from that time until now it has been in building, and it is not yet finished.’ 17 Therefore, if it seems good to the king, let search be made in the royal archives there in Babylon, to see whether a decree was issued by Cyrus the king for the rebuilding of this house of God in Jerusalem. And let the king send us his pleasure in this matter.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


From these verses, we are reminded of the faithfulness and confidence of Sheshbazzar. This is a continuation of the letter that Tattenai sent to King Darius. Verse 16 recounts how Sheshbazzar “laid the foundations of the house of God that is in Jerusalem and from that time until now it has been in building”. 

Sheshbazzar, who is likely also Zerubbabel, was stirred by the Lord to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple. He left the familiarity of Babylon to travel through a dangerous thousand mile trek, leading a rabble of exiles to rebuild something most of them haven’t even seen before. The task that was set before Sheshbazzar was not something that he or the Israelites were qualified to accomplish. Yet, nonetheless, because the Lord had decreed for it to be done, Sheshbazzar pressed on through faith. Though likely plagued by many doubts, Sheshbazzar held fast to his confidence in the Lord and behold, he rebuilt the altar and laid the foundation for the Temple.

Brothers and sisters, let us not forget that faith is an integral part of spiritual warfare. Just like how Sheshbazzar placed his faith in the decree of the Lord so we must consider the promises of God no matter how hopeless or inexplicable our situation may seem to be. We must not only fight for our will to trust God, but we must also press on and continue working towards His promises. When our evangelism efforts seem futile or when our local church congregation seems dead, do we remain faithful and press on in building the Church?

We also see in verse 17 Sheshbazzar’s confidence despite encountering many adversaries. Imagine how discouraged and confused he must have been when God allowed Artaxerxes to halt the temple reconstruction. Yet we see that when he was confronted by Tattenai, he challenged him to tell Darius to have a “search be made in the royal archives there in Babylon”. Sheshbazzar had the confidence that the Lord’s decree would come to pass and that He would make a way for the temple reconstruction to continue. With confidence, he told Tattenai, “and let the king send us his pleasure in this matter.” 

Remember that Sheshbazzar’s confidence was present even before Darius officially allowed the Temple work to continue. It is easy to be confident when things are clearly going as planned but not when the situation is uncertain. Brothers and sisters, is our confidence steadfast or conditional? Let us have confidence by looking to Christ, who has already achieved the victory. Because of the confidence and faithfulness of Christ’s life, we can follow in his shadow and joyfully worship in his finished Temple. 

Consider

1. Do you remain faithful and confident in the Lord during trying times?
2. How can the Book of Ezra be an encouragement to you?