Ezra 6:1-2: The Records Revisited
August 2, 2020

1 Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in Babylonia, in the house of the archives where the documents were stored. 2 And in Ecbatana, the citadel that is in the province of Media, a scroll was found on which this was written: “A record.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


In today’s passage, Darius, the king of Persia, makes a decree to search if a prior decree had been made by the former king. The decrees of the king were to be held with vitality even after the passing of the issuer, and the words of the king remained in power. Though the human king passed away, his laws would remain.

We see a similar case with modern governments today. Laws are created that are to remain in power even after the legislators have exited their office. The United States government, in fact, is founded upon a set of foundational laws and provisions that we understand as the Constitution.

Darius makes the search, finds the record, and reestablishes the decrees of Cyrus as if they were his own decrees because the power of the king’s words still remain in effect.

God established governments to reflect His own power and authority over the world. Just as a government exercises authority over its citizens to administer justice and to facilitate order in the nation, God sovereignly exercises ultimate authority over all nations and all creation. God, above Darius and above Cyrus, is the King above all kings. And hence, since Darius reflects God the King in his office of kingship, here, in the act of Darius, we see a glimpse of God’s superior Kingship as well.

Specifically, we see that Darius is a king who remembers the decrees of the past and is a ruler who is respectful of the promises of his office. And if this earthly king is of such merit, how much more would the King of the Universe be mindful of His decrees?

Darius was only modeling the true King. When Darius sent out for a search of the records, it was to show that God was always remembering His promises. Darius, in his faithfulness to his office, had to do a physical search with his mighty authority as the king of Persia. However, we have a God who is greater. Our God need not make any searches, but rather He always has His promises in the forefront of His mind in His omniscience. With His infinite power, not only is He going to uphold His promises and decrees in the future, but He is fulfilling those promises at this moment. As long as God is God, He is the King. As long as God is King, He remembers His promises. As long as God remembers, He is fulfilling His promises.

So, what did this mean for the Israelites?

Firstly, it meant that God the King had not forgotten of His plan to rebuild the temple even if the Israelites had forgotten. Secondly, it meant that God the King was still working to provide for the redemption of the nation of Israel even when Israel did not labor themselves.

The fact that a foreign king would remember meant that, naturally, God, the King of the people of Israel, would surely remember them— in fact, it was because He remembered that the foreign king remembered.

If this promise that God would be faithful to His promises stayed true for the Israelites, we also know that the same promise applies to us. The Gentiles, the Church, was grafted into Israel and the same promises given to the nation of Israel is given to us. God will be faithful to all the promises He had made to us regarding His salvation for us and His plans for us. God will restore a broken world to Himself by making them His children.

Even for the Church, God has not forgotten His promises. Firstly, He has not forgotten His promise that He would rebuild the temple in three days. In fact, He has already done it. That temple of Christ has been rebuilt, and that temple dwells within all who are in Christ. Secondly, He is continuing that work even when the Church is often disenchanted or downcast in their mission. Though the Church forgets, God is still working.

Are you downcast today? Remember that the Lord has not forgotten you and His plans to glorify Himself through you. Take heart, know that God is doing a mighty work even now, and therefore, rise up, take up your mat, and live as you have been brought to life.

Consider

1. Do you remember the promises of God to you? Let us read the Word to remind ourselves of what He has promised us— He has not forgotten.