Ezra 4:17-22: The Idolatry of the King
July 23, 2020

17 The king sent an answer: “To Rehum the commander and Shimshai the scribe and the rest of their associates who live in Samaria and in the rest of the province Beyond the River, greeting. And now 18 the letter that you sent to us has been plainly read before me. 19 And I made a decree, and search has been made, and it has been found that this city from of old has risen against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made in it. 20 And mighty kings have been over Jerusalem, who ruled over the whole province Beyond the River, to whom tribute, custom, and toll were paid. 21 Therefore make a decree that these men be made to cease, and that this city be not rebuilt, until a decree is made by me. 22 And take care not to be slack in this matter. Why should damage grow to the hurt of the king?”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Here, we see that Artaxerxes sadly listened to and heeded what the adversaries had to say, and he ordered that the Israelites stop rebuilding. We can imagine how disheartened and discouraged the returning exiles must have been after hearing this news. They had finally returned to their homeland and were eager to rebuild Jerusalem, only to be told that they could not do so a few years later. 

What can we learn from this outcome? First, we must learn to put a deeper trust in God. Surely the returning exiles must have been confused after being told by God through King Cyrus to return to Jerusalem, only to be told a few years later that they were not allowed to rebuild the city. And yet, we see in the very next chapter that our God is not limited by human cunning or plans, and that the rebuilding of Jerusalem continues. 

Furthermore, we see throughout the Bible that God’s plan of salvation for us was not limited by man, but rather that everything unfolded according to God’s plan alone. Therefore, brothers and sisters, let us place our trust in the Almighty One once again this morning. 

We can also learn that we must pray for our leaders and those in authority over us, just as 1 Timothy 2 tells us. Just as the Israelites were under the earthly authority of Artaxerxes and the Persian Empire, so too are we subject to earthly authorities. We see in today’s passage that Artaxerxes sadly chose his own kingdom (verse 22) over what the God of the universe had previously commanded Cyrus. Let us read this and be convicted to pray for those in authority over us continually, that they would lead in wisdom and according to His purposes. 

Brothers and sisters, no matter the roadblocks or challenges we face, our God is still King over it all. Let us therefore worship Him this morning and save only in Him. 

Consider

1. Do you pray for your leaders? 
2. Do you trust in God even when things do not make sense? 