Ezra 4:23-24: Haste To Do Evil
July 24, 2020

23 Then, when the copy of King Artaxerxes' letter was read before Rehum and Shimshai the scribe and their associates, they went in haste to the Jews at Jerusalem and by force and power made them cease. 24 Then the work on the house of God that is in Jerusalem stopped, and it ceased until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.
*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


It is clear that those who are not of God are haters of God. This is shown through the way Rehum and Shimshai the scribe went in haste to stop the work of the Lord. The moment when King Artaxerxes’ letter was read, they immediately jumped on the opportunity to thwart the rebuilding of the house of God. Rehum and Shimshai not only desired to do evil but also sought to do it in haste.

Brothers and sisters, if we are truly Christian, we cannot act like this! In fact, we are to act the complete opposite. When we discover that the Gospel comes at a cost, do we make haste to shout “I will follow”? Or do we begin to make excuses, slandering those who exhort us for being too “radical”, too “impractical” or “unloving”? Let our inclinations run hastily to the Lord and away from the evil of this world! 

If there is any part of us that makes haste to go against God-centered truths, we must cut them away. The apostle Paul tells us that “those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires” (Gal. 5:24). Because we are still sinners, the passions of our flesh may seek to do evil in haste, especially when things come at a cost. For instance, when the Lord’s name is openly mocked in public, we may pretend not to notice because our reputation is on the line. Yet we would admit that being a silent bystander to bullying is immoral and contributes to the problem. Likewise, in our retreat to silence when the Lord’s name is mocked, we hastily contribute to the ways of evil rather than righteousness. 

If we, who love the Lord, would fall into such evil against the Lord, are we not to expect the world to also make haste to do evil? We see in this passage that Rehum and Shimshai acted in evil even when there was no stake at all! They simply hated God. It didn’t even take a big reason for them to act against Him. 

Brothers and sisters, just like how these adversaries claimed that they were also Jews, there are many who claim to be Christian but in reality are not. They will make haste to attack the Church the moment things come up that they do not like or are uncomfortable for their flesh. The Gospel is costly, offensive, and bound to be unfavorable to those who have man-centered thinking rather than God-centered thinking. 

Let us not be surprised when false Christians or the world attack the Church that they hate. These attacks should not catch us off guard. Instead, we must be prepared to encounter adversaries and faithfully fight for the truth. 

Consider

1. Have you ever encountered opposition to against the Church? How did you respond?
2. Do you make haste to follow the Lord or do you make haste to deny Him?