Ezra 5:13-15: Decreed by the Foreign King
July 31, 2020

13 However, in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king made a decree that this house of God should be rebuilt. 14 And the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple that was in Jerusalem and brought into the temple of Babylon, these Cyrus the king took out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered to one whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor; 15 and he said to him, “Take these vessels, go and put them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt on its site.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


We see in this passage that God is truly sovereign over the nations. As Tattenai’s letter is read before King Darius, we are reminded once again of how God had used King Cyrus to set forth His purposes. Later on, after Darius confirms what is written in the letter, he also issues a similar decree. Darius not only allows for the temple to be rebuilt, but he also declares that it would be paid at the king’s expense. Through these few verses, we see that the decreeing power of these foreign kings represent God’s ultimate kingship and authority over the world. God’s decree was first proclaimed through the mouth of Cyrus and later continued through the mouth of Darius.

Do we recognize that God’s sovereignty rules over all authorities, including those that deny Him? We so easily forget this because of the worldly ways in which powerful politicians act. But even when government officials have almost no intent in obeying God, all of their actions still end up serving His will. God, in his Wisdom, may even use the foolish decisions of a political leader to bring judgement upon a nation. And yes, even nations that actively suppress the Gospel are acting under God’s sovereignty and ultimately for His glory. The fact that the Church will contain people from every tribe and tongue is a testament of the power of God over all the nations.

Imagine the power that these Persian kings had. They ruled over the first global superpower that the world had ever seen. Nobody in their vast empire would dare challenge their authority. That is why when Cyrus or Darius makes a decree, it is immediately obeyed without question. 

Brothers and sisters, do we fail to recognize that the decree power of these kings is nothing compared to the Word that comes from the mouth of the Lord? For God’s word never comes back empty; it always accomplishes that which He proposed (Isaiah 55:11). A man could still manage to disobey the decree of Darius, but to act outside of what God has decreed is an impossibility!

Let us consider how God makes all events in history serve His will. God determines the people who rule, the timing of their rule, and the decisions that they make - all of history unfolds to reveal His Glory. 

Consider

1. Do you trust that God is sovereign over all the nations?
2. How does the immutability of God’s decree convict you to work for Him?