Ephesians 4:1-3
April 11, 2020

1 I therefore, a prisoner for the Lord, urge you to walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which you have been called, 2 with all humility and gentleness, with patience, bearing with one another in love, 3 eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Having discussed the mystery of the Gospel and the satiety, gaiety, and fullness it brings to both the Jew and Gentile who has Christ dwell in his heart through faith, Paul now urges the Ephesians - and all Christians - to unity.

Christian, unity is the name of the game. Racial, national, physical, geographical, and other identities are secondary to the one that we have in Christ - blood-bought and adopted into His family. 

We are called and urged to unity because as Romans 11:36 tells us, it is from God, through God, and to God and thus gives Him glory forever. 

It is from God because it is His very Triunity - the state of the loving community of three Persons in one - that gives us the model of unity and enables us to love each other. Ephesians 3:14-21 makes that abundantly clear for us: Paul prays to the Father who strengthens us with power through His Spirit so that Christ may dwell in our hearts through faith and that we may know the love of Christ and the fullness of God. It is through God because it is His Spirit that strengthens us (16) and gives us the power at work within us (20). The chapter closes by giving to Him His due glory in the unified church and in Christ Jesus (21), demonstrating once again the  beautiful nature of the Trinity and that the singular, unified church glorifies Him. 

Upon writing on the truths of our God, Paul then urges the church at Ephesus to walk in a manner worthy of their calling (4:1) as sons and daughters of the Most High and people eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace (3). This unity speaks to our communion with God himself and with one another. While we await a perfect unity with God and with others in our eternal rest, we must currently seek unity with God and one another now. 

We are not unified to one another by any “secondary” identities but by His blood and His dwelling within us. We achieve this unity by dealing with one another with all humility and gentleness, patience, and most of all love with hearts that are not reluctant but are eager for maintaining the unity of the Spirit. We are not unified to God himself by the works of our hands or the righteousness that we work towards, but by the fact that He loved us first. Let us seek communion with our Lord through vigorous prayer and reading of His Word. 

As we remember our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ’s death this Easter weekend, let us seek to remember also His life and ministry, all of which He spent living out virtues until He demonstrated that perfect love that surpasses knowledge (3:19) by dying on that wretched cross. Let us then pick up our spiritual weapon of prayer as Paul did, and ask that we may be strengthened to walk as a unified body in a manner worthy of our calling, and with humility, gentleness, patience, and love as Jesus did 2000 years ago.


Consider

1. How have you been seeking and striving towards unity with your immediate community members (family members, host families, neighbors, etc.) even while social distancing? And if they aren’t fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the Gospel (Eph 3:5) yet, how are you praying and striving for them to share in the immeasurable riches of his love and glory?

2. Have you worked to make Manna a more loving and unified community that follows the model of the Trinity and demonstrates this loving unity to unbelievers on campus? How will you work to make this a reality when we return to campus?

3. Remember that God has deemed that the manifold wisdom of God may be known to people through and in the church (Eph 3:10, 21). Are you committed to a Biblical church while on campus and at home? Are you serving the body with covenantal love and steadfast faithfulness?