Ephesians 4:7-10: Boldness in Christ
April 13, 2020

7 But grace was given to each one of us according to the measure of Christ's gift. 8 Therefore it says,

“When he ascended on high he led a host of captives, and he gave gifts to men.”

9 (In saying, “He ascended,” what does it mean but that he had also descended into the lower regions, the earth? 10 He who descended is the one who also ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.)


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Though we have one hope in one God (as we have read yesterday in verses 4 to 6), we also have individually received grace (verse 7). We see that not only is this grace given to us, but it is given to us “according to the measure of Christ’s gift.” What is the measure of Christ’s gift?

I believe, here, Paul is pointing back to the undeserved gift that we have received which is grace — He is pointing to the very fact that Jesus has “ascended on high” (verse 8; Psalm 68:18). Specifically, he is pointing to the magnitude of Christ’s ascension and what that means for His “captives” who were carried up with Him. Often we do not think of Christ’s ascension (Acts 1:6-11) as part of God’s grace upon us, but it was during this ascension that Jesus reminded His disciples of the Holy Spirit that will come upon them, and also it was then that Jesus gave hope that in the same way the Church will be lifted up. Furthermore, it showed where Jesus originally belonged, and therefore showed us how much more it was glory for us that he “descended” for us (verse 9).

In this way, Paul is describing the “measure of Christ’s gift” in two folds. First, it is the extent of God’s magnitude: His perfectly enough amount of gift of which we shall not be in want (Psalm 23:1). Secondly, it is a reminder of the gift of the Spirit that we as Christians receive who is enough for us to sustain us. Not just “enough” in the general sense of the word, but enough perfectly according to our needs, and transforming us to meet the needs of the Church.

When Jesus ascended on high, “he led a host of captives” (verse 8). Those captives are those who have been conquered, and therefore have now been won over to the Kingdom of God (Revelation 5:5). These captives are the Church, and they are the “gifts to men” (verse 8). This is not to say that we in ourselves are the gifts, but we are the gifts to men with the grace within us that has transformed us to be “apostles, the prophets [...]” (verse 11). That is to say, we have been transformed by the grace of Christ given to us in amazing measures to be the gifts to the world that they may also receive the grace of God.

Upon explaining this, Paul feels the need to go into a parenthetical to explain the extent of this ascension of Christ (verses 9-10). He emphasizes that Jesus must have descended “into lower regions, the earth” because that news of the humble incarnation for a God who has come from so high is an idea of love and grace so unimaginable! This shows the extent of the “measure of Christ’s gift” — it is extending and connecting heaven and earth (Genesis 28:12; John 1:51)!

This Christ, who descended to a level unbefitting of the Creator of the World, have not only ascended to heaven to be alone, but to “fill all things” (verse 10). This is to say that He has filled us with the Holy Spirit, and therefore we are always with Christ, and furthermore, we are awaiting also for the physical day when all the earth will be new and the heavens will be news and the world will be filled with the saints lifting up Christ in worship and praise.

This is our Christ, and the extent of His mercy and grace in even His ascension. Because He has ascended, we have Him in our hearts, and we have the hope of ascending with the rest of the saints as well to be glorified with the Son besides the Father.

Let us embrace such a gift that we have received in Him.

Consider

1. Have you thought about the Ascension of Christ as being gracious before? Reflect on it.
2. How had Christ conquered you and made you His captive? Jesus is our Lord and He has conquered us, reflect how you have been conquered and remember how that was for you.