Ephesians 5:1-2: Imitators of God
April 20, 2020

1 Therefore be imitators of God, as beloved children. 2 And walk in love, as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us, a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Paul follows the preceding verses about the sealing of the Holy Spirit to show what kind of identity they are to practice. If upon them had been set a seal, they are now under the kingship and authority and rule of the one who has set a seal on them.

As the vassals of a king look up to the ruler for all matters of life and follow in His example to carry out the facilities of the kingdom, so must we. A true king is not one who “lord over” his subjects but rather one who becomes a servant to all (Matthew 20:25-28). Our True King, Christ, showed this to us that we may become His “imitators” (verse 1).

We are to be children of the God who rules all things and decrees all things to the point of serving the undeserving sinners who rebelled against His Kingdom! This King is first because He had assumed the role of the last, the humblest of servants. This means as a vassal looks up to the king and as a child looks up to his father, we are to look up to the cross, the work of God, and see how we are to model that in our lives as well (verse 1).

How do we do this? How do we follow and imitate God by being a servant?

We do so simply by looking at how Christ has done it for us. Our King has become the ultimate servant for us so as to rule over us with His divine love unimaginable and unmatchable. If so, we do the same task of becoming servants.

We serve the needs of those who are lacking. We feed those who are hungry. We build for those who have no homes. We teach those who do not have the resources to learn. We take in those who are fatherless.

Yes, I mean physically, but more so, in the Kingdom-mindset for their souls.

Who are more lacking than those who do not have God? Who are hungrier than those without the bread of life? Who are more homeless than those without an eternal house in heaven? Who are more untaught than those without the Law of God? Who are more fatherless than those without Our Father?

You see, the way in which we are to live has been set for us for Jesus is “the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6). He is the way in which we must “walk in love” (verse 2). Hence, whenever we sacrifice so one more person may hear the Gospel or whenever we let ourselves die so that one more person may live, we have become a little bit more like Christ.

We must look to how Jesus “gave himself up for us, a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God” (verse 2) — and realize that what satisfies God is not the extent or the number of works that we have done “for God,” but rather the heart of our works that points to the Work that has already been done through Christ. This is the way in which we walk in love.

We are imitators of God only when our works and our walks no longer point to ourselves, but to the king who is the only one to be glorified. As vassals, we lift up the king who was the greatest servant for us, and we show and honor that king by becoming servants ourselves. Yet, it is not that we are servants that God is glorified, but it is that our servanthood points to Christ’s servanthood, that glorifies God.

Consider

1. How has your servanthood pointed to Christ’s servanthood recently?
2. The quarantine has probably forced us to serve in different methods — what are some ways that we can utilize this opportunity to be poured out even more?