Ephesians 4:30-32: Grieving the Holy Spirit
April 19, 2020

30 And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. 31 Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away from you, along with all malice. 32 Be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God in Christ forgave you.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



What does it mean to “grieve the Holy Spirit of God” (verse 30)? How is it that we can “grieve” God?

We grieve God by living as the world, that is, the Gentiles or the “ethnos” — the nations (Ephesians 4:17). Paul has already described the ways in which we must differ from the world in the past couple verses, but I believe the main reason a Christian should not commit such sins as the Gentiles lies in this one verse in verse 30 that asks the Christian not to “grieve the Holy Spirit of God”.

We, the children of God, who were loved by God, do not sin and rather, hate sin because of the fact that we hate the idea of grieving the God who has set his royal “seal” upon us (verse 30). He has set us apart for the “day of redemption” and shown us, the elect, His redeeming love that makes us into new, distinct creatures. 

If we can truly say that we love Christ — that we have come to know that Christ loved us, and therefore we also love Him (1 John 4:19), how can we be okay and indifferent to doing something that grieves Him? Will you be able to say that you love your parents and lash out at them with a knife to their hearts? Will you nail your own brother to the cross again and again as you enjoy the sin that corrupts you? I doubt that that person can say he loves.

Do we grieve the Holy Spirit? Is there unrepentant sin that you simply set aside and make excuses for? Do you love that sin more so than Christ so you take it and claim it as lord over your life to grieve our Lord? If you are truly a Christian who has been “sealed” with the Holy Spirit within you, this idea that you may have unrepentant, recurring sin should grieve you to the point of desiring even death over sinning against our Lord.

You have been sealed! That is a kingly stamp of declaration that you have been adopted, you have been set, in the righteous and perfect decree of the King, as an heir with Christ to the Kingdom of God. In this Kingdom, where God is, there cannot be any sin or unclean things. Do you act like one who has been sealed to be a citizen of the Kingdom?

And so, if you have known such love from God to be set apart and to not desire to grieve the Spirit, how can you not love the other members of the Church with whom you will spend all eternity with? They too have been sealed?

Will you show “wrath and anger and clamor and slander [...] along with malice” (verse 31) against your own brothers and sisters? If we have a common Father who we have inherited all good things from, mustn’t we spend it and share it with those of whom we have been called to serve and love? We have been shown love and now we must show it with all our doings and words.

You see, we cannot help but be “kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another” (verse 32) because in the love of Christ, we have been forgiven.

So, let us be “angry and do not sin” (Ephesians 4:26), as our Father also is angry with sin to the point of satisfying His anger on the cross (Romans 5:9). If we know the extent of God’s love that was shown us on that cross to the point of absorbing His own wrath so severe, we must not only hate sin as God hates sin, but must love to love as God loves to love.

Let us love brothers and sisters. Let us be joyful and love, and let us be angry and sin no more.

Consider

1. Do you hate sin? Does it grieve you that you are grieving God when you sin?
2. Have you put above God yourself in such a way to say God’s love on the cross was not enough? Do you manufacture your own design of love that does not satisfy?