Ephesians 4:11-13: Maturity to Manhood
April 14, 2020

11 And he gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the shepherds and teachers, 12 to equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up the body of Christ, 13 until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



God gave us all that we need to know Him and to grow to become more like Christ. In addition to the sufficient Word of God presented to us in 66 books of the Bible, and the Holy Spirit to guide us, God gave us those who have been called to the occupation of ministry. They are “the apostles, the prophets, the evangelist, the shepherds and teachers” (verse 11). We no longer have the apostles who were called directly by Jesus and were eyewitnesses of Jesus, but their works and writings still remain with us through the Bible they were inspired to write part of, and by the seeds they sowed as with the spilling of their blood to make the Gospel known to the ends of the earth.

As for the others, the early church had prophets who led the Church through their gifts of revelations from God though today, their prominence and leading is debated. The evangelists, those particularly gifted with the ability and passion to share the Gospel, are fundamental in going out to the nations and making known the truth among those who do not yet know the Messiah. The shepherds, those who are given the gift to lead and to shelter the Church so they may not be led astray, are seen in the works of pastors and church leaders who care and love their flock. The teachers, who are often shepherds, admonish the members of the Body with revelation from the Word of God to point their eyes to the Lord Most High.

All these roles exist “to equip the saints for the work of ministry”, meaning they are given such gifts to reveal, evangelize, shepherd, and teach for the sake of equipping others to do ministry. Their ministry is to teach others to do their ministry (verse 12). When Paul says “saint,” he is not leaving out the roles he previously mentioned, but he includes them in the “saints” who are to do ministry. This means that no matter who you are, your main job, your primary goal in life, is to do ministry. Just as the number of roles that “equip” is many, the number of roles in “ministry” is many. Whatever we are called to during a season in our life, we are to do ministry.

What is this “ministry”? Paul answers it immediately — it is “building up the body of Christ” (verse 12). It is to strengthen the Body by feeding it the Word of God, practicing the love of Christ through outreach, and relying on God in prayer. As members of the Church grow together in their respective ways, the Body grows as one.

And we are to do it “to mature manhood” (verse 13). This manhood is described as arriving “to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ” (verse 13). We can never arrive at the perfection that is Christ, but we look up to Jesus as would a younger brother to the older brother who came before him (of course He is much more than that to us). We try our best to become like Him and to be molded into His likeness — mature manhood is not arriving at the position of Christ (which is heretical and an impossibility), but rather arriving at the point of maturity that seems to model Christ. When people look at this Christian, “the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ” becomes apparent.

We do this by attaining “the unity of faith and the knowledge of the Son of God” — we become more like Christ as we come to have faith in Him and get to know him more and more (verse 13). When we learn from the teachers and are shepherded, we gain knowledge and faith of Christ and that should transform us, making us mature into a likeness of Christ.

What does this look like? — verses 14 to 16 will explain in tomorrow’s devo.

Meanwhile, brothers and sisters, I pray you consider if you have truly looked up to Christ and have been mature in becoming like Him — growing “to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ” (verse 13). If not, if people cannot tell that you are a follower of Christ, it must be repented of.

Let us look to Him and become more like Him.

Consider

1. How are you doing your ministry to build the Body up?
2. Do you look like Christ to other people?
3. Is it your goal in life to become more like Christ as all Christian ought to desire?