Ephesians 4:14-16: Growth in Christ
April 15, 2020

14 so that we may no longer be children, tossed to and fro by the waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by human cunning, by craftiness in deceitful schemes. 15 Rather, speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, 16 from whom the whole body, joined and held together by every joint with which it is equipped, when each part is working properly, makes the body grow so that it builds itself up in love.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Are you growing in Christ? 

It is common for us to talk about growth as Christians. It is not uncommon to hear that someone has “grown so much this past year” or that someone has “grown so much during their time at Princeton.” We praise God for such growth, and it is certainly something to get excited about. But what are these statements based on? 

Here, Paul gives us some insight as to what growth in Christ looks like (and what it does not look like). 

We see that in verse 14, mature Christians are not “tossed to and fro by the waves.” Without a solid foundation in Christ and who He is, we cannot help but be like the ship without an anchor, inconstant in our judgements and so easily swayed by the deceit in this world. This is why all Christians must study the Word carefully, lest we be tossed to and fro. Furthermore, we cannot pick and choose the parts of the Word that we will be anchored in. As soon as we compromise one part of God’s Word to our own liking, we have become that ship that is “carried about by every wind of doctrine” (verse 14). 

Notice that movement is not the same as growth in verse 14. As Christians, it can be so easy to chase after emotional highs—many times to simply crash back down. Without a deeper affection for Christ (and those around us) and a deeper knowledge of who He is, this is simply movement. Brothers and sisters, let us long to grow in Christ, not simply be moved back and forth. 

How then are we supposed to grow? “By speaking the truth in love” (verse 15). That is, we live by the truth of Christ and His Word in love. This truth is a crucial part of our growth, but we mustn’t neglect to love others and teach this truth out of love, rather than out of spite. Likewise, love is at the heart of Christianiy, but without the truth, it has no basis. Thus, truth and love must be coupled together in our lives. 

However, we cannot only focus on ourselves and our own personal growth because there is no such thing when we are in Christ. Rather, we must remember that we are a part of the body of Christ that “when each part is working properly...builds itself up in love” (verse 16). Brothers and sisters, let us never think that our growth or sin is a personal matter that affects only ourselves. Instead, let us grow as a body, encouraging and speaking the truth to one another in love.

Consider

1. Are you growing in Christ? 
2. Is your life rooted solely in the Word of God?
3. How can we grow together as a body, even when we are separated physically? 