Ephesians 5:25-33: Love of the Head
April 25, 2020

25 Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her, 26 that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water with the word, 27 so that he might present the church to himself in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish. 28 In the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. 29 For no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, just as Christ does the church, 30 because we are members of his body. 31 “Therefore a man shall leave his father and mother and hold fast to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.” 32 This mystery is profound, and I am saying that it refers to Christ and the church. 33 However, let each one of you love his wife as himself, and let the wife see that she respects her husband.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Paul begins Ephesians 5 by calling Christians to be imitators of God. Brothers and sisters, we often profess our desire to be more like Christ, but do we remember why?

Why imitate God? Simply put, it is for our good. By God’s grace, we understand that not imitating God would be following a sin that corrupts us (Eph. 4:22). Who are we if we are not in communion with Christ but an abomination to the Lord? To live is Christ (Phil. 1:21)! Knowing this, we imitate God because we love and treasure everything about him: his Gospel, his Kingdom, and all of his character. In fact, such a God has made us in his image for the very purpose of imitating Him for his glory. Would we not misrepresent our God but become his image; just as an idol compels the pagan to worship its god, would we as image bearers live in such a way to cause others to worship our God. We can only do this if we strive to imitate Him as beloved children (Eph. 5:1). 

In marriage, there is a unique and God-glorying calling to imitate Christ’s loving headship as the husband. As Paul continues to explain the mystery of marriage, he clearly states in verse 25, “Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her”. Men, this is your priority in marriage - do not take the idea of the love of Christ lightly! Christ loved the Church and this love was an unconditional love. Christ fully knew us in our brokenness and faithlessness and loved us nonetheless unto Calvary. Look to your wife with this same unconditional love, knowing her completely yet loving her for who she is. It is loving her even when she sins against you, fails you, and makes things difficult for you that makes such love unconditional. There will be fruitful seasons of harmony, but there will also be trails that will teach you what is the love and grace of Christ. Be sanctified, and love your wife as Christ loved the Church! 

Paul gives us an idea of how Christ loved his bride so that husbands can better imitate him. First, as discussed yesterday, Paul describes who Christ is with respect to the Church. Christ is the head of the church, meaning he is its servant leader, who takes initiative and bears responsibility. Likewise, husbands are to be the head of the wife (Eph. 5:22), taking initiative so that she may flourish, for it is his responsibility. Though Eve may have been first to sin, God asked Adam “where are you?” (Gen. 3:9) - for Adam, in his headship, bore the responsibility of sin. Adam’s headship led to death, but we look to Christ’s headship, which led to life. Christ’s sacrifice demonstrated this as he took the lead to save his bride and suffer for her. It was not the Church that planned for its salvation, but Christ, who decisively took the initiative to leave his throne in Heaven to rescue his bride. Husband, be the one to take charge and the first to go up against the enemy, even if it costs you your life.

How does Christ love his Church? First, verse 25 says that he “gave himself up for her”. Christ died for our protection so that we may be saved from the wrath of God (Rom. 5:9). In the same way, husbands are called to protect his wife and children and preserve the life of the family. Secondly, verse 26 says that Christ did this to “sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water with the word”. Husbands, beyond providing for physical needs, be sure to nourish your wife with spiritual bread daily, through encouragement and guidance from the Word of God, which is the work of Christ. Paul then says in verse 27 that Christ made the Church so that she “might be holy and without blemish”. In the same way, would your every action be for the blessing of your wife so that she can be all that God calls her to be. Oh, what good news it is that just like how the wife flourishes under the plan of the husband, we as Christians can follow the plan of our Bridegroom knowing that one day we would appear in perfection, pure and without blemish! Love your wife, and bless her in remembrance of this! 

Finally, Paul says in verse 28 that “husbands should love their wives as their own body”. We think of our bodies daily; we constantly feed it and never leave it unattended. Let us imitate Christ as he in verse 29 “nourishes and cherishes” the Church. Husband, make sure that the needs of your wife are met and nourish her with prayer. Do not forget to cherish her too! The love of Christ is not mechanical nor lifeless - what a friend we have in Jesus! Be a good friend to your wife: know her, make memories with her, and strive not to be roommates, but soulmates! We see this deep harmony of love in verse 31 as Paul references Genesis 2:24, “Therefore, a man shall leave his father and mother and hold fast to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh”. This union of husband and wife is inexplicably special. It is bound by the power of God, and no man should separate it (Mark 10:9). Do not forget that God planned out marriage before the foundation of the world to be a witness to the Gospel. Enjoy this union and enjoy this Gospel! 

Now, men of God, consider marriage as rewarding but consequential. Are you ready for this, or do you need to step up? Your wife is called to submit to you, and so you are called to have a leadership your wife can honor. Seek hard after the Lord, and grow in your knowledge and love of Him constantly, praying daily and understanding what needs to be done. Give no opportunity to the devil (Eph. 4:27). Do not dishonor your wife, but more importantly, do not dishonor the Lord. In marriage, we have the unbelievable privilege to witness the Gospel to the dying world. Far be it from us to display heresy. How wretched would it be if we showed in our marriage that Christ puts down his bride, or that Christ does not shepherd his bride, or that Christ deserts his bride. No! Instead, we show that Christ loved his bride unconditionally unto death and so she finds joy in submitting everything to Him. 

Leadership in marriage is not easy, but remember that Christ has gone before you and will empower you through the Holy Spirit. Count it all joy, for in those difficult days you will be sanctified to be more like Christ. So take up your cross and follow him (Matt. 16:24). 

Christians, in Christ we have the perfect example of both submission and headship. Let us continue to look to Him and imitate Him not only in marriage but in everything that we do! 

Consider

1. What are you really looking for in marriage? What excites you about marriage and does it match with what the Bible teaches? Is there anything you may need to adjust in your mindset?
2. Men, are you ready to take the role of husband? Looking ahead, in what ways must you step up? Women, do the men you desire match the qualities of a Godly husband? 
3. When the world looks at you, what are you an image of? Pray that you may imitate and reflect God above all else.