Ephesians 6:18-20: Praying in the Spirit
April 30, 2020

18 praying at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end, keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints, 19 and also for me, that words may be given to me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel, 20 for which I am an ambassador in chains, that I may declare it boldly, as I ought to speak.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Ephesians is said to be an epistle that begins in the heights and ends on its knees. Though the last chapter is coming to a close, let us not read it as if Paul is easing out to transition into closing remarks; rather, let us read these few verses as the final crescendo of Paul’s epic exhortation. There are formidable rulers and authorities and powers of Satan that are against us and we must soldiers equipped with the armor of God. Yet as soldiers we are nothing without the voice of the Commander. If we are to win spiritual battles, and if we are to be connected to the power of God, we must pray! 

Prayer is the breath of the Christian life. In the words of John Piper, it is the “wartime walkie-talkie”. Brothers and sisters, do we recognize that we are surrounded by spiritual warfare or do we come at life with a dull and blind complacency? We often do not pray because we forget that communicating with the Commander is the difference between victory and defeat. 

Paul urges us to see our desperate need to constantly pray. He tells us in verse 18 that we must pray “at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication” and “keep alert with all perseverance”. To Paul, prayer is truly like taking a spiritual breath: to run the race we must continually pray, pray, pray. That is why he tells us to do it with “all perseverance” - would we need to have perseverance if we only prayed when we “felt like” doing so? No! We must aim to pray every chance we can get, with “all prayer”; let us have our silent prayer, shouting prayer, groaning prayer, fervent prayer, and kneeling prayer all be part of our constant prayer. We can only see this constant need to pray if we “keep alert” with eyes set on spiritual things. Indeed, prayer is important, but Paul emphasizes that it must be “in the Spirit”. Our prayers must not be meditating aimlessly or selfishly in our own thoughts and desires, but rather, they must be with full submission to God, seeking to advance the Kingdom with a heart of glorifying Him.

Paul then emphasizes that we must not only pray for ourselves but also for “all the saints”. Let us not forget that we as the Church are one body such that failing to pray for each other means bringing harm unto ourselves. We see in verse 19 that even apostle Paul himself needed intercessory prayer! Paul asks that “words may be given to me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel”. Let us mimic Paul’s prayer request for it is truly “in the Spirit”; though it pertains to his situation, it clearly aims for nothing but the advancement of the Gospel for God’s glory. As Paul writes this letter, perhaps he is thinking about how he will soon be giving his defense before Caesar. 

Brothers and sisters, no matter where we are, let us press on in constant prayer for ourselves and for each other. And in our prayers, would we learn to pray like Paul, who, though in prison, considers himself an “ambassador in chains”. He cares not about when he will be set free or what pain he may endure but rather how he can take the Gospel and “declare it boldly”! 

Consider

1. What does your prayer life look like? Do you pray once and feel covered for the rest of the day? What are some ways you can be more constant in prayer? Let us strive for both scheduled prayers and spontaneous prayers! 
2. Do you pray “in the Spirit”? Do your prayer requests ultimately serve you so that you may better serve God or do they have nothing to do with God’s will? 