Ephesians 1:7-10: Redemption and the Fulfillment of the Mystery of the Gospel in Christ 
March 25, 2020

7 In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace, 8 which he lavished upon us, in all wisdom and insight 9 making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his purpose, which he set forth in Christ 10 as a plan for the fullness of time, to unite all things in him, things in heaven and things on earth.

*** Please read the verses and pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Here, Paul emphasizes the redemption that we can enjoy and the mystery of the Gospel that is revealed through Jesus. It is crucial for us to understand what it is that Jesus has done for us and what we now enjoy in Him. And Paul goes into it briefly here. 

First, Paul starts off by talking about the redemption through Jesus’s blood. Redemption means to be bought with a ransom from captivity. And the only thing that could pay such a cost was the blood of Jesus. We are bought from slavery into slavery before God. 

This points to a critical truth: we are always slaves of something. We like to think that we are in control of our own lives, and we often do everything we can to hold onto this sense of control. But the reality is that until we are ransomed by His blood (v. 7), we are always slaves to our sin. When we are ransomed, we are no longer slaves to sin. That is not our identity anymore, and let not the enemy tell us otherwise. 

Paul then talks about the forgiveness of our sins. This means to have our debt cancelled, and we can only have our debt cancelled because of Jesus. It is nothing that we did, which is why it is according to His grace. That is why Paul starts this entire section with “in Him.”

We must realize our own helplessness to save ourselves to truly appreciate the grace that God has shown to us. When we understand this, we always have a reason to rejoice. Even in this season of sickness and change, we can truly give thanks for the grace that we have been shown. 

Furthermore, this was not an arbitrary forgiveness or something that God decided to do at some point in our lives. Paul makes it clear that God set forth this plan that has been perfectly fulfilled through Jesus; God has made His plan of salvation clear through Jesus. 

There is something important we must understand here: the Bible is not about us! All of it points to Jesus, all of it is about Jesus, and all of it is fulfilled in Jesus. There is nothing more to gain. Nothing more to get. And we must live in this truth, that we have it all in Christ. Then, no matter what is gained or lost in this world is completely overshadowed by what we have in Jesus, who is the fulfillment of all things. 


Consider

1. Do we live as those that have been bought with a price, as those that were redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ Himself? 

2. How should we live as those who have found it all in Christ? How should we approach our schoolwork, jobs, and relationships? 