Ephesians 6:5-9: Servants to Christ
April 27, 2020

5 Bondservants, obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling, with a sincere heart, as you would Christ, 6 not by the way of eye-service, as people-pleasers, but as bondservants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, 7 rendering service with a good will as to the Lord and not to man, 8 knowing that whatever good anyone does, this he will receive back from the Lord, whether he is a bondservant or is free.
9 Masters, do the same to them, and stop your threatening, knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and that there is no partiality with him.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Continuing our three part series on the earthly relationships that reflect and show a semblance of God’s relationships (and thereby His nature), we read about the relationship between bondservant (or servant or slave) and master.

This relationship is perhaps harder to understand within the modern perspective, but we can think of it as one similar to the relationship between an employee and an employer, or for us students, as a relationship between a student and a teacher. That is, the relationship is like that of one doing certain work under command and authority of another. One side of the relationship holds a certain responsibility to the other while the other side holds some form of authority and power over the other.

Again, as in the past three devotionals that we studied together, we are to understand that even this relationship is supposed to be a reflection of God’s relationship. Particularly, the slave-master relationship is seen as a relationship that we have with God. God is repeatedly, in both the Old and the New Testament, shown as our master. Knowing now that this relationship of being a servant to God lives in conjunction with the fact that we also have a relationship to God that is like that of wife to a husband and child to parents, how are we to understand that our relationship with God is reflected in our relationship with our “earthly masters”?

Firstly, in our obedience to “earthly masters” (verse 5), whether they be employers or teachers, we are to see our need to obey the Lord Jesus who is above all authority and power. As Psalm 123:2 shows, “as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master”, we are to look to God “till he has mercy upon us.” It may seem unsettling that we are “slaves to God”, and may seem like we are losing control, but in reality, all of us are under some control. Before we were saved, we were slaves to sin (Romans 6:16), but we have been bought and have now become slaves to righteousness (Romans 6:18). As Psalmist also says, we have become servants to the Lord: “I am your servant, the son of your maidservant. You have loosed my bonds.” (Psalm 116:16). We were always slaves to something in our lives. At first, we were slaves to sin and death, and now we have become slaves to God and righteousness.

Secondly, we are to see how we need to worship and serve God from the core of our hearts. Knowing that we are serving God and not man, now we understand that we once served our “masters” because of our desire to serve something other than God — that is, we served our own evil motives, but now, we have the ability to be able to do all things in enslavement to righteousness. We can serve God truly even in the works that we do for others, and we can obey our earthly masters “with fear and trembling, with a sincere heart” (verse 5) because we fear the Lord. We are serving “with fear and trembling” no longer because the earthly master can take away our food or wages, but we serve our earthly masters because in such a way we remember our master who has authority over more than our bodily lives (Matthew 10:28).

We do not do work merely “by the way of eye-service, as people-pleasers” (verse 6) as the Samaritans did to avoid punishment (2 Kings 17:29-41), but we work “with a sincere heart” (verse 5) because we know that we are doing it to render “service with a good will as to the Lord and not to man” (verse 7). We can do the “will of God from the heart” (verse 6) because we know that “whatever good anyone does, this he will receive back from the Lord” (verse 8). We have all been given different talents on this earth, and we are to be diligent in the talents we have been given because we are given gifts in heaven according to how we exercised our talents given to us on earth (Matthew 25:14-30). Truly, in heaven, those of us who exercised our talents for the Lord (and that is only possible for those who are mastered by the Lord) will receive the greatest gift of His joy: “Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a little; I will set you over much. Enter into the joy of your master” (Matthew 25:23).

Thirdly, we are to see, from the imperfection of our “earthly masters”, the need for our perfect Master who is in heaven. Despite the commands of verse 9, we know that our earthly masters do not reflect the Master in heaven. They seem to either not know or forget that our Master and theirs in heaven are the same, and only on earth they are practicing some form of authority and power over us — even their temporary power is given to them through God’s sovereignty. David was one such character in the Bible who was even hunted down by his master Saul. Our earthly masters must do their best to emulate the love of God and His perfect position of being the Master, but they often are much too weak to do so, or are unwilling. What must those under such authority do at such a point? Are we to revolt and hate them and not follow the above verses 5-8?

The answer is similar to what we discussed yesterday regarding our parents. Though they may not be perfect, we endure their abuse or insufferable behavior knowing that we are doing the best we can on our side to try to reflect God in our lives. If they abuse us, we still endure knowing that Christ endured abuse and tyrannical rule of the Roman justice system and the Jewish priests. If they slander us and refuse us our rights, we look to Christ again who was blasphemed against by the Pharisees. As long as we are not being forced to take sides against God, we endure as Christ endured for it will not be long as we serve the God who we so very need (Romans 8:18-19) We can hope because we have a great Master who has gone before us to prepare for us a house (John 14:2).

We, as Christians, know that this visible world is not all there is to it. We also know that all this world was created to reflect the order existent in God. So, even in the strangest and toughest of obediences required, let us hold fast knowing that God is the true Master we are serving, our hearts can truly be worshipful in obedience thanks to God, and knowing we have a great master who is preparing for us a great reward.

Brothers and sisters, some of us may not know if we will even have earthly masters to serve as we graduate, but even still, let us hold fast knowing that we always have a kind Master caring for us.

Consider

1. How can we serve God in our works? Specifically, how can you in what you are given?
2. Do we hope to see our heavenly Master?
