Ephesians 6:5-9: Armor of God
April 29, 2020

13 Therefore take up the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand firm. 14 Stand therefore, having fastened on the belt of truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness, 15 and, as shoes for your feet, having put on the readiness given by the gospel of peace. 16 In all circumstances take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming darts of the evil one; 17 and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



After having told us to put on the full armor of God in verse 11, Paul describes this armor in detail. These pieces of armor are ones that would have been very familiar to the Ephesians, as they were worn by the Roman soldiers all around them. Just as no soldier was without their armor, we are all called to put on this armor of God to fight against the enemy.

However, we mustn't simply see this armor as a list of spiritual disciplines that are to be learned and practiced. Of course, it is very insightful to break down each piece of the armor of God and the purpose that it serves (a good resource is John MacArthur’s sermon series on this). However, that is not the focus of today’s devotional nor is it the main focus of today’s passage! 

You see, the armor of God is not a list of steps to become a better Christian. The armor of God is exactly that: God’s armor. It is not our own. It is the very armor that was worn by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ when He took the stand against sin and death, and we see it throughout the Old Testament. 

For example, Isaiah 59:17 says that God is the one who “puts on righteousness as a breastplate, and helmet of salvation on His head.” Isaiah 11 speaks of the coming One of whom “righteousness will be His belt.” This is not just any armor that we are called to put on; it is the armor of God!

Brothers and sisters, this is how we know that we can stand under the weight of this world, full of sin and temptation. It is not because we have a secret formula to do so but because we know that this armor has already been tried and tested and has come out victorious. So therefore take heart, for Jesus has given this armor to all who believe. 

The issue at hand, then, is whether or not we will accept this calling and put on this armor. As Paul said in Ephesians 4:1, we are now called to walk in a manner worthy of this calling, worthy of this armor worn by the Glorious One. Just as there was not a single Roman soldier without his armor, all of us are called to put on this armor and fight this battle. And we do not pick and choose the days that we want to fight for the Kingdom. We are called to fight until the war is over or until He calls us home. Just as the Israelites who were cowering on the sidelines ran forth to fight the Philistines after David killed Goliath, so too must we run forth in the victory of our Lord over sin and death. 

Our Savior has not left us in this world empty-handed and hopeless, so let us not live as though we are! Instead, let us bow our knees before the Father today and ask again that today, He make us more like Jesus. 

As a final thought, let us sing this children’s hymn this morning, and may it be our prayer:

Stand up, stand up for Jesus! ye soldiers of the cross;
Lift high His royal banner, it must not suffer loss:
From vict’ry unto vict’ry, His army shall He lead,
Till every foe is vanquished, and Christ is Lord indeed.
 
Stand up, stand up for Jesus! The trumpet call obey:
Forth to the mighty conflict, in this His glorious day;
Ye that are men now serve Him against unnumbered foes;
Let courage rise with danger, and strength to strength oppose.
 
Stand up, stand up for Jesus! Stand in His strength alone,
The arm of flesh will fail you, ye dare not trust your own;
Put on the gospel armor, and watching unto prayer,
Where calls the voice of duty, be never wanting there.
 
Stand up, stand up for Jesus! the strife will not be long;
This day the noise of battle, the next the victor’s song;
To him that overcometh a crown of life shall be;
He with the King of glory shall reign eternally.
 


Consider

1. How are you called to fight for the Kingdom right now? 
2. Do you feel confident and hopeful in what God has called you to, or do you feel empty-handed?
