Ephesians 5:7-14: Lighting the Darkness
April 22, 2020

7 Therefore do not become partners with them; 8 for at one time you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light 9 (for the fruit of light is found in all that is good and right and true), 10 and try to discern what is pleasing to the Lord. 11 Take no part in the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead expose them. 12 For it is shameful even to speak of the things that they do in secret. 13 But when anything is exposed by the light, it becomes visible, 14 for anything that becomes visible is light. Therefore it says,

“Awake, O sleeper,
    and arise from the dead,
and Christ will shine on you.”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

The structure of Ephesians is very simple. The first three chapters focus on who we used to be and who we are now. The last three chapters focus on how we are now supposed to live, given who we are. And the idea of how we are now supposed to live is very clear in this passage. 


We must live as “children of light”! 

Brothers and sisters, it is very simple. You are either in the light or in the darkness. There is no middle ground. And because we are now children of light in Christ, we must live as such. There is no such thing as a Christian who is in the darkness. Of course, we may have dry seasons and we may slip up sometimes, but we must still walk in the light. 

What does “walking as children of the light” look like? Verse 9 gives a very clear answer: to walk in goodness, in righteousness, and in truth. We must also “try to discern what is pleasing to the Lord.” We are often faced with decisions in life that do not have specific guidance from the Bible. In the face of such decisions, it is natural to weigh certain factors like the effect on our relationships, the effect on our schoolwork, etc. But our greatest allegiance in these decisions must be to pleasing God.

This can lead to “decision paralysis,” where we are so unsure in our actions because we do not know the path that is most pleasing to God. It should go without saying that we must first seek counsel from the Bible and then from the brothers and sisters around us. But even after all that, we are so often left unsure of what to do. 

Paul Washer responded to this dilemma like this: imagine a child going outside with his father after a snowstorm. The father leaves footprints as he walks along the snow, with strides far bigger than that of his child. The child is determined to walk in the footprints of his father despite it being difficult for him, having to jump to each footprint. The child may fall while trying to do so. He may miss a few of his father’s footprints. But to anyone watching, no matter how many times the child falls, it is clear as day that the only desire of the child is to walk as his father did. It should be the same for our lives. We may make the wrong decisions, and we may fall down sometimes. But through all these things, we must be fixated on pleasing God and living like Jesus did. 

It does not stop at living in the light. We must also realize that this means that we “take no part” in the darkness. In fact, we are called to “expose” the deeds of darkness in verse 11. This does not mean that we look down in condemnation or in hatred on others. Rather, by how we live and what we say (as children of the light), we are called to expose the darkness. 

Brothers and sisters, this is what it means to walk in the light and to expose the darkness. This is a much greater calling than to simply get uncomfortable when a sexual conversation arises, or to limit our alcohol consumption, or to just be kind to others.  We are called to advance the Kingdom and to have no tolerance for sin!

It is easy to read all of this and to become unsure of whether we can really walk in this manner. When this happens, we must remember that we are not called to walk in our own light, but in the light of Christ. It is Christ that empowers us. It is Christ that shines upon us (verse 14) and enables us to live as children of the light.

So “awake, O sleeper”! Stop spending mindless hours playing video games and scrolling through TikTok. Stop living in the darkness of pornography, bitterness, and drunkenness. Let us live as who we are. Let us live as children of the light. 

Consider

1. Are you in the light or in the darkness?
2. Do you simply tolerate sin, or do you stand boldly in its opposition? 