Malachi 1:10: Return to Worship
May 5, 2020

10 Oh that there were one among you who would shut the doors, that you might not kindle fire on my altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of hosts, and I will not accept an offering from your hand. 


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


God does not desire a polluted worship, as that is not worship. He will not look at people who mumble a couple words correctly during prayer, or those who sing a couple notes in correct melody as those who are of His heart. Such debasement of worship is detestable to God, and He, as we read from this passage, has no pleasure from it.

So what shall we do?

The first step is to cease. Cease the worship that is not worship to clear room for the true worship. We need to stop, and “shut the doors” so that we can put out the unauthorized fire (Leviticus 10:1), lest God does it for us. Shall we wait until the Lord breaks apart congregations, locks the church doors, and puts to silence the choirs by a disease such as this current pandemic to prevent offering of our muddied hearts in worship?

Let us stop. Let us stop with the modern theologies that put creation above the Creator. Let us stop with the sentimental words and emotion-producing music that all but drown out the groans and moans of the receiver of our worship. Let us clear the air of the incense that is not pleasing to the Lord so that the air would be filled with the Spirit once again.

Our God is not a mortal man that He would have mistakenly unleashed a deadly disease upon the nations with force enough to blow shut the doors of churches and homes. He is a God who is furious at the evil of this world in both the secular malls and in the religious churches. All the world is facing the consequences of its wayward heart, but only the Church is rebuked, not punished, for its evils as the Lamb has taken our punishment.

So shall we sit still and wait out the rebuke of the Lord while we continue our ignorant worship? Far be it from us that we would do so. Even when all the world lounges in ignorance, this is when the Church ought to grasp its heart and fall on its knees before the Lord of hosts. Yes, we have more time with family, some of us, and have more free time to do things, some of us, however, all the while, the world is in pain — “all creation waits with eager longing” (Romans 8:19). I hope we would not be those who call “evil good and good evil” (Isaiah 5:20) at this time. Instead, we ought to see the depths of the evils that caused the Lord to remind us once again of our mortality.

Only then, only when we come to see the weeds and thistles growing in our hearts that we had not noticed before, when we see the dark sin polluting the vessel of our being, and once we have repented of such sins to realize how much more the grace of God and the suffering of Christ was in magnitude, shall we offer up sacrifices that are again pleasing to God. Our offerings to God are worth naught if it is not in response to the sacrifice of Christ.

Then, let us rejoice, for though while on earth we will never be able to offer perfect sacrifice in our own bodies, we have a Christ who accomplished just that for us. For us the Body, God no longer says “I will not accept an offering from your hand.” If we know that truth and if we have faith in Christ who lived out that truth, let us continually offer up worship that is not polluted to the best of our heart, soul and mind.

When our Father, the gracious God who has adopted us, has rebuked us, we take it with gratitude and with a heart that seeks to repent. This rebuke, though weighty and burdensome now, will bloom to prepare for us a greater love that He wishes to lavish upon us. Then, we will say, “Ah, why did we ever doubt? Why were we of such little faith? He is truly our Father.”

Brothers and sisters, have we permitted the sin of empty worship to impact our lives? Or have we allowed for our worship to be a tainted one that offers only the worst of our efforts to God? If so, let us repent. This is the perfect time to do so!


Consider

1. Today’s verse and devotional was short, please take some time to fill the void with reflection and prayer to the Lord asking for the ways in which we have erred.
2. Clear the Stage by Jimmy Needham is a favorite song of mine that describes the need to turn back once again to seek God with a right heart. Please have a listen!