Malachi 1:13-14: Feared Among the Nations
May 7, 2020

13 But you say, ‘What a weariness this is,’ and you snort at it, says the Lord of hosts. You bring what has been taken by violence or is lame or sick, and this you bring as your offering! Shall I accept that from your hand? says the Lord. 14 Cursed be the cheat who has a male in his flock, and vows it, and yet sacrifices to the Lord what is blemished. For I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my name will be feared among the nations.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 
For the past few devotionals, we have seen the great sin of the Israelites in their lazy offerings to the Lord. What we must understand from this is why the Israelites gave such offerings to God, lest we come to dishonor God in the same way. 

Today’s passage gives a very simple answer: the Israelites did not fear the Lord. In verse 14, God makes it clear that He mustn’t be dishonored by polluted offerings because He is a “great King” that will be feared. In other words, the Israelites gave such offerings because they did not honor God as such and did not fear Him.

But what does it mean to fear the Lord? This is essential not only in our understanding of today’s passage, but in the entirety of our walk with the Lord. Proverbs 9:10 tells us that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and we are told in Acts 9:31 that the disciples built up the church in the “fear of the Lord.” God Himself commands us to fear Him, so it is crucial that we understand what fearing the Lord means. 

One of the clearest pictures of fearing the Lord is in Exodus 33, when God passed by Moses. Imagine how Moses felt at that very moment. The Almighty One, in the fullness of His holiness, glory, love, justice, and greatness was passing by. Surely, Moses would have been filled with awe and wonder, but it goes deeper than that. Had God not safely hid Moses in the cleft of a rock before He passed, he would have died. And yet, since Moses was safely hidden in that cleft, he was able to revere and be in awe of the Lord without the dread of being instantly condemned in God’s holiness and killed. 

This, brothers and sisters, is how we must fear the Lord. We are to behold God in all of His greatness and glory and be amazed. We are to know the Lord as the Holy One who searches both mind and deed and fall to our knees in reverence. We are to know the hatred and wrath that God has against sin and tremble. However, we are not to be filled with the dread and terror of being instantly condemned because we are hidden in the cleft that is our Savior, Jesus Christ. 

When we fear the Lord, we appreciate His greatness. And that was the problem of the Israelites. They did not fear the Lord, and they did not see His greatness. That is why Israelites found it wearisome to come before God in verse 13. Something else had captivated their hearts and minds other than this greatness. Perhaps they saw greatness in their wealth and possessions, leading them to offer only the most useless livestock to the Lord. Brothers and sisters, whatever it is, anything that we hold in greater esteem or value than God Himself tells us that we do not fear the Lord as we ought.

We cannot forget who God is, especially in this time. Even as sickness, hardship, and death are more present than ever, we must still fear the Lord above all else and know that He is greater. Only when we fear the Lord and His greatness can we truly trust in Him because we can then trust that God is above all things. 

This morning, let us not forget the greatness of God. Let us walk in “fear and trembling” as Philippians 2:12 says, and let us seek to give unto the Lord the honor that He is due. 

Consider

1. Do you fear the Lord?  
2. What do you hold the greatest reverence for? 
3. Let us reflect on the greatness and awesomeness of God at this very moment.  
