Malachi 2:1-3: Curse for Those Who Offer Dung
May 8, 2020

1 “And now, O priests, this command is for you. 2 If you will not listen, if you will not take it to heart to give honor to my name, says the Lord of hosts, then I will send the curse upon you and I will curse your blessings. Indeed, I have already cursed them, because you do not lay it to heart. 3 Behold, I will rebuke your offspring, and spread dung on your faces, the dung of your offerings, and you shall be taken away with it.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 

Malachi prophecies that the priests have provoked so much of God’s righteous anger that God will spread dung on their faces in rebuke (verse 3)! This is unspeakable to do to any human, yet why does the Lord himself do such a harsh and humiliating thing? As we see in verse 3, the Lord says that this dung is nothing but the “dung of your offerings”. God was simply giving the priests a taste of what they had given Him. As we had read in Monday’s devotional, the people and the priests were giving to God a polluted sacrifice, the least of their flock. The priests ought to have humble and fearfully recognized what they have done - in offering such sacrifices, they offered dung to the Lord almighty! The Lord was merciful in his response for these priests deserve much worse, but rather than turning to repentance, they even questioned the Lord, “How have we despised your name?” (Mal. 1:6).

When the Lord spreads dung on the faces of the priests, he is also removing them from his temple. This is because if an animal still had dung in its body, the dung must first be burned with fire outside of the camp (Exo. 29:14). Likewise, if the priests have dung on their faces, they simply cannot be in the presence of a Holy God and must be taken outside of His sanctuary. In verse 2, we see that they will be ineffective as priests because the Lord will curse their blessings, removing their ability to intercede for the people. Moreover, this curse will continue on to their offspring, which in the case of the tribe of Levi, are the future priests. Because there will be constant disobedience, curses will continue to overtake them, as this is nothing more than what is stated in the Law given by the Lord (Duet. 28:15). 

When we consider the insufficiency of the priests generation after generation, let us marvel at the sufficiency of Christ as our High Priest (Heb. 4:14-16). While the priests’ sacrifices were like dung to the Lord, Christ’s sacrifice was so pleasing to the Lord (Isa. 53:10) that it ended the sacrificial system altogether! 

If Christ is now the one and only High Priest, then what does this passage mean for us? Originally, all of Israel was called to be a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (Exo. 19:1-6). Yet because of their sin, it was necessary to set up a priestly institution as an intermediary. But now, because of Christ’s sacrifice for his Church, we as Christians can be this “holy priesthood” as we walk with Christ as his body (1 Pet. 2:5). If we are called to be a Kingdom of priests who depend on the sacrifice of our High Priest, let us consider the relevant warnings of Malachi in verses 1-2. We would be walking in disobedience if we do not listen to the Lord and or take it to heart to give honor to His name. 

Brothers and sisters, do we listen to the voice of God, given to us through Scripture? Let us not only read Scripture, but truly hear it with listening ears. Or do we fail to take it to heart to honor the Lord? Let us not fall into formalism, but rather have a heavy burden and deep passion for God to be glorified! Far be it from us to follow blemished doctrinal defections. Instead, let us remember that we must offer Him our very best and tremble at the idea of smearing the Lord with our dung.

Consider

1. When we turn to our idols and come to the Lord half-heartedly, do we recognize how perverse it is? Is your attitude against sin strong enough? 
2. Take a moment to appreciate Christ’s sacrifice and how wonderful it is that He is your High Priest!
