Ephesians 6:21-24: Continuing in God’s Grace
May 1, 2020
21 So that you also may know how I am and what I am doing, Tychicus the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord will tell you everything. 22 I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage your hearts. 23 Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 24 Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with love incorruptible.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 

In these closing verses of Ephesians, Paul blesses the church of Ephesus with a few powerful benedictions. Paul both begins and ends Ephesians by prayerfully wishing for grace to be with all who read his epistle. This should come as no surprise because we know Paul is a minister of God’s grace (Eph. 3:7). Grace is a defining theme that ties together the book of Ephesians. Paul teaches that we were adopted to praise God’s grace (Eph. 1:6), saved by God’s grace (Eph. 2:5), and were each given a gift of grace (Eph. 4:7) that we are compelled to give to others as we imitate Christ (Eph. 5:1). As we finish the book of Ephesians, let us follow Paul’s wish and continue in God’s grace, both receiving it and providing it.

There are several truths we can glean from Paul’s closing benediction. First, Paul, though in prison, is doing everything he can to encourage the church at Ephesus in love. He not only writes this letter, but we see in verses 21-23 that he also sends his helper Tychicus to be a source of encouragement. During this time, not all of Scripture had been written and likely Tychicus had many stories and teachings from the life of Paul. How lucky it is that we now have access to encouragements and truths that the early church did not have through the book of Acts, all the epistles, and the Gospel! 

Secondly, Paul wishes in verse 23 that “peace be to the brothers, and love with faith”. The peace here is more than just temporary tranquility from the world, but rather it is from “God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ”. This is crucial, because we know that He himself is our peace, (Eph. 2:14) and there is no true peace apart from being mutually rooted in reconciliation with God. In addition to peace, Paul offers “love with faith”. The word “with” shows us that love and faith are intricately tied together. It mirrors how Paul constantly puts “God the Father” with the “Lord Jesus Christ”. God would not be our Father if Jesus is not our Lord. In the same way, without faith we do not have true love. In Christ, our faith works through love (Gal. 5:6); as John Piper puts it, faith expresses, acts, and works itself by producing love. 

Finally, Paul wishes that “grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with love incorruptible”. Paul builds upon the idea of “love with faith” by showing that our love is one that is incorruptible. An incorruptible love is one that is both eternal and imperishable, and this can only be possible if it is coming from God. In other words, this love with which we love Christ and each other must come from Christ. Thus, we have this love only when we are with Christ. That is why love and faith are inseparable - for it is faith that unites us to Christ! Let us remember that at times we may have the appearance of love, but whatever does not proceed from faith is sin (Rom. 14:23). 

Brothers and sisters, let us continue on in God’s grace, growing in His love and peace through faith. But let us also be careful and constantly examine our fruit, making sure that it is rooted in nothing but God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Consider

1. Over the past two months, what has God been teaching you through the book of Ephesians? Share this with one another for our Word is living and active!
2. Do we bear the fruit of love and peace? If so, do they come from faith or an ulterior source?
