Malachi 3:13-15: Words Against God

May 19, 2020


13 “Your words have been hard against me, says the Lord. But you say, ‘How have we spoken against you?’ 14 You have said, ‘It is vain to serve God. What is the profit of our keeping his charge or of walking as in mourning before the Lord of hosts? 15 And now we call the arrogant blessed. Evildoers not only prosper but they put God to the test and they escape.’”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


We live in an age when even one misplaced word or a mistaken formulation of a sentence could heap mounds of prejudice against you, and a complete social deprecation of your character. More so than ever before, people are sensitive to the even least consequential utterances of words, and are recognizant of the dangers of the tongue.


Yet, it also seems that this is the generation that most breaks the third commandment given to Moses on Mount Sinai. “You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain” (Exodus 20:7) says the Lord, but an individual, even a Christian, often would ponder more about their choice of words to their friend, than about their thoughts and words to the God of the universe.


It is to a generation such as this that the Lord of hosts speaks with all might and force — yet in a way so pleading and heart-breaking only as a Father could speak.


So what words of the Israelites have been so “hard” against the Lord (verse 13)? What kind of words could be so hurtful to God? It is that the Israelites bear a testimony of God that is not true of Him. They say “It is vain to serve God” because they do not see profit from serving the God of promises (verse 14). They instead “call the arrogant blessed” because they seem to prosper (verse 15). Such words are untrue and outright evil because of two reasons.


Firstly, they do not recognize their own actions that contributed to the consequences they now are consumed by. Majority of the text before this passage testify to the evils of the exiles of Israel that explicitly disregarded the Law. They will look not to the evils that they have committed but look to the world and its fallenness to see enticing of a fruit to eat of. They see the evildoers do well and think it wise to follow and therefore lay fallow in the fate of those who do evil. What foolishness that they would not consider the rebuke of the Lord to find in it a short suffering that leads to an eternal bliss?


They do not recognize that they have not done good, but have done evil. And hence, they acknowledge not that the hardship they face is the rod of the Lord that is brought down in love. God is a God who is a proper parent to His children (Proverbs 13:24), and therefore will not hesitate to bring the rod if the need arises.


By saying that God is blessing the evildoers (verse 15), they are not only blaspheming the justice and righteousness of God, but are not recognizing themselves to be sinners.


Secondly, it is quite obvious that the Israelites do not desire God, but the things from God. Their words are hard because they speak of serving God as something to profit from and to prosper from. If we truly think God to be a being with whom we can have a relationship with, it would be horrifying to think of God as merely a vending machine or an ATM where we follow the instructions offered by the machine to receive certain goods we want in return. Yet, this is the way the Israelites thought of God. Instead of doing sanctifying works because they loved God, they kept His charge for profit (verse 14). When it did not pay off, they decided the ATM was dysfunctional and moved on to a different ATM. This ATM turned out to be the worldly way of thinking — to call the “arrogant blessed”, and to follow in the path of “Evildoers” who “prosper” even though “they put God to the test and they escape” (verse 15).


If anyone goes to their friend and says, “I can’t hang out with you anymore. I’m just not getting the kind of value I need from our relationship.”, we know that the individual never had love for the friend to begin with. If anyone goes to their spouse and says, “I just don’t think you’re the right parent for me. It’s time for me to move on.”, we may deduce that this person does not understand the Biblical concept of covenantal love, hesed, in Hebrew.


The Israelites were doing this very same thing to God. They had served God, not for Himself, but for what He gave to them. Those are perhaps the hardest words anyone could hear.


I admit, we live in a post-truth world where love has become defined on the shaking sands of the human heart, but we, the Church, must stand solid on the Rock that is Christ. We have truths about love that we cannot uproot ourselves from, and we have a foundation so immutable that we cannot escape it except to fall to our deaths. Though the world makes the self deity, could we look to God for our source of all foundational truths? And if so, could we look to God as more than the fulfiller of our desires, but rather the very object of desire itself? For that is the love that was shown us on that rugged cross.


Our words are often the first outward emergence of our inward knowledge and desire of God. If so, when we talk about God, we ought to analyze and speculate whether we recognize that firstly, we are sinful and deserving of any evil, and secondly, that though we were deserving of such evil, we were adopted into the family of God where we are condemned no more.


If we know these truths, how can we speak harshly against a God who merely wishes to rebuke us for us to be greater saints, and a God who desires a genuine relationship so much so that He sent His only Son to die for us?


Let us not say, “It is vain to serve God. What is the profit of our keeping his charge or of walking as in mourning before the Lord of hosts?” as we may be saying that it is vain because we think that we have not done any wrong before the Lord and are perfectly righteous — and no one is in themselves perfectly righteous (1 John 1:8).


Let us also not say, “And now we call the arrogant blessed.” as that is revolting against a God of love that has adopted us into His perfect family.


Consider
1. Do we often complain to God without examining our deathly actions first?
2. Do we speak against God but desiring not God Himself, but what He gives us?