Malachi 3:1: Return of Elijah Reminded

May 15, 2020


1 “Behold, I send my messenger, and he will prepare the way before me. And the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant in whom you delight, behold, he is coming, says the Lord of hosts.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


We see in Malachi 2 verse 17 that the people weary the Lord with yet another set of insulting questions. They ask the Lord why He delights in evil and where his Justice is. What a foolish thing for them to ask! Not only have the people of Judah despised the Lord through their idolatry, polluted worship, and faithless marriages, but they also speak without any recognition of the condemnation they rightfully deserve in their wickedness. It is enough already that God in his mercy did not destroy them, but now the people themselves are asking for the God of Justice. They are essentially asking Him to withhold the very mercy that is keeping them alive - asking for judgement means asking to be judged!


Yet despite such an ignorant and insulting question, the Lord yet again responds with mercy. This time, he promises a “messenger, and he will prepare the way before me”. The Lord is reminding Judah of all the promises and prophecies about the coming Messiah and the messenger who would herald His coming. 


Who is this messenger? This question is later revealed in Malachi 4:5 when the Lord says that he will send “Elijah the prophet”. Elijah was a Tishbite man appointed by God to be his messenger and to make bold declarations to a hostile King and an idolatrous people. He was a man of the wilderness hated by many, yet God gave him faith and a prayerful spirit to perform miracles before the people that would turn them to repentance (1 Kings 17-19). His faith to challenge the prophets of Baal and Asherah led many Israelites to fall on their faces and say, “The LORD, he is the God; the LORD, he is the God” (1 Kings 18:39).


This messenger as we know is fulfilled in John the Baptist, who came in the spirit and power of Elijah (Luke 1:17). John the Baptist along with proclaiming the arrival of Christ likewise preached a message of repentance and confronted evil rulers and pharisees. Jesus later proclaims that John is the last prophet of the Old Covenant because He himself, being God, is ultimately the Prophet to come (Matt. 11:13). John is merely a voice, quickly appearing and then disappearing; as Elijah, he symbolizes how the message of all prophets of the past point to Christ and prepare for His work of salvation. Just like how Christ came before John, so Christ was before all the prophets and everything that existed (John. 1:15). 


What this means is that all of the Old Covenant prophets and every second of Old Covenant history was meant to prepare for Christ. To the people of Judah, it appeared that God was distant and slow to answer their cries, yet in reality, through it all, God was not only patiently withholding his wrath but also faithfully carrying out his plan for restoration. There was not and will never be a moment in which God does not act in His perfect character. Do we recognize this, or do the prayers we offer parallel the cries of Judah, carrying the same insulting stench of ignorance?


Now, if John the Baptist is the “messenger” from the verse half of verse 1, one might think that he is also the messenger in the second half of verse 1. Yet we see that this “messenger of the covenant” must be someone different. This second messenger is the one “whom you seek”, meaning he refers to the long awaited Messiah! But going back to the first half of verse 1, what’s even greater is the fact that it says the first messenger will prepare a way before me. Here, God is saying John, in the spirit of Elijah, prepares for me to come. Right after, He then says “the Lord whom you seek” will come. Since in this one verse God refers to this Messiah in both first and third person, we now know this means he is sending his Son, but imagine how confusing this verse must have seemed to those reading it before Christ. 


It is truly such a privilege that in Christ, we have clarity and fulfillment in everything about the laws and prophets. In the second half of verse 1, Malachi prophesied, Christ will “suddenly come to his temple”. Because of Christ, who tore the veil, when we are saved, he suddenly comes into the temple of the New Covenant, which is our hearts because we are now in Him (Jer. 31:33). Truly, through Christ our Lord, we now have a Covenant that gives us life and a messenger in whom we delight (verse 1)!


Brothers and sisters, this is the God we serve: He looks upon the insults of people far below his infinite holiness with patience and responds with a promise of scandalous grace! Let us recognize who we are and who He is! 


Consider

1. What are some ways in which you, like the people of Judah, question the faithfulness of God? Does it match up with the character of God we see in Scripture? How does it affect the attitude of your prayers? What are some truths that we can remind ourselves of?