Malachi 3:2-5: Messiah the Refiner

May 16, 2020


2 But who can endure the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appears? For he is like a refiner's fire and like fullers' soap. 3 He will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he will purify the sons of Levi and refine them like gold and silver, and they will bring offerings in righteousness to the Lord. 4 Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the Lord as in the days of old and as in former years.

5 “Then I will draw near to you for judgment. I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, against the adulterers, against those who swear falsely, against those who oppress the hired worker in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, against those who thrust aside the sojourner, and do not fear me, says the Lord of hosts.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Yesterday, we saw what Malachi said in response to Judah, who asked the insulting question of “Where is the God of justice?”. The Lord reminded His rebellious people that he will send a messenger to prepare a way for Himself to come down as their Messiah. However, Malachi immediately turns back to the people and in verse 2 asks: “who can endure the day of his coming?”. In their foolish self-righteousness, the people had assumed that judgement would only affect the wicked surrounding Pagan nations. But the answer to this question is nobody! The people asked the question in an attitude of complaint, but they should have asked in fear and trembling, for “who can stand when he appears”?


It would have been disastrous for the people if God’s judgement came down that day! For nothing unclean will ever enter heaven, nor anyone who does what is detestable or false (Rev. 21:27). If even Moses was told that he could not see the Lord’s face and live (Exo. 33:20), how much worse is fate of the corrupted Levites and all of Judah! God makes it clear where this judgement is aimed in verse 5, saying “I will draw near to you for judgement”. 


Yet in light of this frightening question, Malachi describes in verse 3 how after the Lord comes, the sons of Levi “will bring offerings in righteousness to the Lord”. How is this possible? There seems to be a discrepancy between how the people will be judged. On one hand, verse 2 says the Lord would be “a refiner’s fire and like fullers’ soap”, one who removes impurities so that sinners can shine like pure, precious metal. Yet on the other hand, verse 5 says that the Lord would be a “swift witness against” sinners and later says that he shall set them ablaze so that it will leave them neither root nor branch (Mal. 4:1). 


Is God’s fire refining or all-consuming? Paul makes it clear in Romans 2:11 that God shows no partiality - it is not His fire that invariably blazes stronger from person to person, but rather it is the identity of the person that determines how he will stand. Not everyone is gold or silver! For it is those without Christ, who are nothing but sin, who will be utterly consumed by fiery judgement. Yet the fate of those in Christ is different. These are us Christians, who by God’s grace have died to self and have been raised with Christ to become like precious metal in Him. Though sin is still present in our lives, through sanctification, God’s refining fire will wipe away our sin in an all-consuming manner, leaving us without blemish so that we can be reunited with him! The very reason why we stand justified is because we were given a regenerated heart and have turned into precious metal. Our offerings are no longer an abomination to the Lord but are rather “offerings in righteousness” because they are offered along with Christ’s perfect sacrifice, the singular “offering” which will always be “pleasing to the Lord” (verse 4). 


Brothers and sisters, let us remember that our Messiah is our refiner. Let us count this as joy, for if we are not refined then we have no place in heaven. We often hear about the process of purifying precious metal, but Malachi also says that God will be like fullers' soap. Fullers were people who removed impurities from wool. This process involved washing the wool with fullers’ soap, beating it against the rock, and stretching it to increase its strength. Make no mistake, the process of sanctification is thorough and severe and we ought not to take it lightly. But yet in this we rejoice, for the tested genuineness of our faith will result in the praise and glory and honor of our Lord Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 1:6-7). For if we truly were without discipline then we are illegitimate children rather than sons of God (Heb. 12:8). Let us once again praise God - for in Christ, we have become the sheep separated from the goats (Mat. 25:33), like wool, waiting to be purified. 


Let us make haste to put off our old self and put on our new self. If our hearts are made new in Christ, we have no desire for the sin that once consumed us. Carefully examine the ways of the wicked in verse 5. Are we like sorcerers and adulterers, tainted by the culture of the Babylon of today? Or do we swear falsely, ashamed to speak the truth which is Christ? Or do we have a heart for the lamenting widows and fatherless orphans around us, who do not yet know their Bridegroom and Father in heaven? By the Holy Spirit, let us be engaged in constant sanctification.


Brothers and sisters, let us look to Christ, our Messiah and refiner. For soon we as precious metal shall be fully refined so that when he looks upon us, His image will be radiantly reflected back!


Consider

1. What is our attitude towards the momentary affliction of Christian life? Do we see the good in it and endure with steadfastness? Consider the words of Charles Simeon: 

“My dear brother, we must not mind a little suffering for Christ’s sake. When I am getting through a hedge, if my head and shoulders are safely through, I can bear the pricking of my legs. Let us rejoice in the remembrance that our holy Head has surmounted all His suffering and triumphed over death. Let us follow Him patiently; we shall soon be partakers of His victory”