Malachi 2:17: God Does Not Love the Evildoer
May 17, 2020

17 You have wearied the Lord with your words. But you say, “How have we wearied him?” By saying, “Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them.” Or by asking, “Where is the God of justice?”

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Here we see the fourth dispute in Malachi: that God is not holy and He delights in evil rather than stand against it. 

What drove the Israelites to utter such blasphemy? They were discouraged and confused because they had heard from the prophets Haggai and Zechariah that the Lord would restore their land to greatness (Haggai 2, Zechariah 2), but they were still just a nation that was barely recovering from exile. They were told that the Lord would once again inhabit Jerusalem and its temple, but they had yet to see God’s presence in their temple. Essentially the people of Israel were asking the question: if there is a good God, then why don’t I see His goodness? Or put a different way, the Israelites were charging God directly: God if you are a good God like you say, then prove it! 

What an arrogant, foolish, conceited thing to say! This is the holy God that killed 24,000 Israelites for their sexual immorality in Numbers 25. This is the God who is so holy that Moses, a friend of God, would have died if he saw the Lord. This is the Holy One that made Isaiah scream in dread and terror when he saw the Lord because he realized his own sinfulness. 

Therefore, to charge God with not only being unholy, but also delighting in evil is a baseless charge against the character of God. The Israelites were failing to remember who God was and what He had done. Do we not also do this? Do we not question God’s goodness when it is difficult to see Him, just as the Israelites are doing here? When we feel as though God has forgotten about us, do we make a charge on God’s character? Perhaps we doubt his goodness, or perhaps we doubt his perfect love for us. Brothers and sisters, let us be careful with our words, lest we sin against God. Let us remember who God is, that He is a good and holy God. 

But Judah’s blasphemy does not end at simply charging God’s holiness. They go on to ask for a “God of justice.” Somehow, the Israelites were so blind to their own sin, their own dead offerings and faithless marriages, that they demanded justice be served. Let us be clear: if justice were delivered at the exact moment the Israelites asked “where is the God of justice,” they would have all been damned in an instant. 

We know that we cannot scoff at these Israelites because we do the same thing. We are so quick to complain before God and question His goodness before seeing the sin rooted within us that prevents us from truly coming before the Lord. Even Job, the man who we all know as the one that faithfully withstood great trials, sinned in this way by affirming his own blamelessness before that of God’s (Job 33:8-12). 

But perhaps the greatest folly in today’s passage is that the Israelites didn’t understand the greatness and beauty of what God had promised them. They were so shortsighted that they did not rejoice in the promise of God’s coming covenant, where He would write His “law on their hearts” (Jeremiah 31:33). They had no regard for the fact that the holy God had not only returned them from exile after their countless and unending sins, but had also promised a coming glory to the land (Zechariah 8). Instead, they had the audacity to demand that God show his goodness when He had shown them nothing but goodness, mercy, and love. 

Again, are we not guilty of the same thing? Do we not fail even this morning to remember what Jesus has done for us and the great promise that we have in Him? Do we not forget that one day, the Great King who rules all the cosmos will personally wipe each tear from our eyes (Revelation 21:4)? Do we not forget what mercy and love God has lavished upon us by adopting us (1 John 3:1)? Do we not ignore the Spirit that we have been given to help guide and counsel us? And do we instead focus only on the issues at hand, forgetting the promises that are made to us and who it is that made these promises? 

Far be it from us, brothers and sisters. Far be it from us. 


Consider

1. Is there any part of us that questions God or holds any bitterness towards Him? Let us reflect carefully and ask God to help us trust in who He is. 
2. Let us take time this morning to remember who God is and what He has done for us. 