Malachi 3:13-15: The Remembering Remnant

May 19, 2020


16 Then those who feared the Lord spoke with one another. The Lord paid attention and heard them, and a book of remembrance was written before him of those who feared the Lord and esteemed his name. 17 “They shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in the day when I make up my treasured possession, and I will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him. 18 Then once more you shall see the distinction between the righteous and the wicked, between one who serves God and one who does not serve him.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Thus far in our study of Malachi, we have seen the faithlessness and shamelessness of the Israelites. They gave half-hearted offerings while living in sin, they were unfaithful in their covenant marriages, and they even questioned God and His character. And we have seen that as a result, God had turned His face away from their offerings and their weeping because it was tainted by their sin. 


But what about the righteous? What became of the remnant that feared the Lord? In today’s passage, God Himself encourages all of us to continue to “fight the good fight” (1 Timothy 6:12) and promises that serving Him is not vain, as the Israelites thought (verse 14). In fact, it is just the opposite — it is exceedingly worth it. 


In verse 16, we immediately see that the omnipotent God of the universe pays attention to those that fear Him. It can be easy for us to get discouraged just as the Israelites did when we see the troubles in our lives and those around us. We may think that God does not truly care, or that our troubles are not significant enough for God to notice. But take heart, brothers and sisters, for God not only pays attention to those that fear Him, but He also hears and remembers (verse 16). 


God sees when you choose to dedicate time to Him in prayer daily. He sees when you treat worship services online with reverence, even if nobody will know if you simply roll out of bed a few minutes beforehand. The Almighty One notices when you suffer for His namesake, when you endure trial and hardship faithfully. And we see today that He not only notices, but He hears and remembers. 


What becomes of those that He remembers? God promises that they will be His (verse 17), and that they shall be His “treasured possession,” just as a son is to his father. He promises that they will be spared from His judgement against the wicked, and their distinction will be clear (verse 18). What could be greater than this: that the Beautiful and Perfect One would call this creature from the dirt His treasured possession and declare it to be His own? 


So we say again, brothers and sisters, do not lose heart! For our God does not forget as we do, and He sees all things. He is surely coming to judge the living and the dead, and to give to each person what they are due. So when we begin to doubt God’s timing or His presence, let us remind ourselves of this truth. 


For those that are a part of this faithful remnant through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we have this great hope. Therefore, let us all confess once again this morning that serving the Father is overwhelmingly worth it. 


“Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him.” 

(James 1:12)




Consider

1. Do we truly believe that serving God is worth it? 
2. Do we live as though we will one day give an account for our lives? 