Malachi 3:8-12: Stealing from God
May 18, 2020


8 Will man rob God? Yet you are robbing me. But you say, ‘How have we robbed you?’ In your tithes and contributions. 9 You are cursed with a curse, for you are robbing me, the whole nation of you. 10 Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. And thereby put me to the test, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you a blessing until there is no more need. 11 I will rebuke the devourer for you, so that it will not destroy the fruits of your soil, and your vine in the field shall not fail to bear, says the Lord of hosts. 12 Then all nations will call you blessed, for you will be a land of delight, says the Lord of hosts.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Anyone, even the most apt robber, would think twice before partaking in the robbery of a president or a senator of the United States government. To steal from an official of perhaps the most powerful government in all the world would be a suicide mission at worst and an imprisonment at best.


The Israelites had been commanded quite clearly in the Law about the need to offer up to the Lord the tenth of their firstfruits (Genesis 14:20; Leviticus 27:30-33; Deuteronomy 14:22-29). This tithe would be a declaration of the Israelites of their knowledge and belief that God was the one who provided all things to them. It would be the act of giving back the portion of what was already owed to God, and God gifting the rest of the nine portions to the Israelites. Tithing was not an act of offering to a needy God, but the dedication of the treasures of our hearts to the only God.


This tithe would be used by the Levites who had no inheritance of their own, and would be used to provide for the needs of the tabernacle (and the temple) and the needs of those who were taking care of the temple. It was not that the Lord would consume the tithe, but He would actually give it to Israel’s ministers for Israel’s own good.


Yet, here, we see that the Israelites had abandoned the tithe (verses 8-9). Though no sane individual would rob the United States government, the Israelites were willing to rob God and His officials.


To this disgraceful act of ignominy to God’s name, God subjects Himself to a test. This is a ridiculous idea — a man may be put to the test for he is an ignoble, wicked human being who cannot be trusted, but God? The Holy God who is perfectly righteous (Isaiah 8:13)? The immutable God who is perfectly truthful (Numbers 23:19)? Even Ahaz, an evil king of Israel dared not to test the Lord (Isaiah 7:12). You shall never put the Lord to the test as it is an implicit assertion that there can be such a thing as the degradation of God’s perfection (Deuteronomy 6:16), yet God puts Himself to the test out of His exasperated love for Israel.


In verses 10-12, the depths of God’s Fatherly love is revealed. He desires to bring Israel to fruitfulness. He would love to see Israel to be blessed with all that they need. Yet, He withholds it as a Father would to His children who need much rebuke and reconsideration of their ways. Sometimes, our struggles and suffering are the results of our righteousness in a broken world. Sometimes, our pains are for God to strengthen us. Sometimes, as is this case, God admonishes us with the strikes of a loving parent in order for us to turn back from our evil ways so as to fix our eyes upon what is true.


God desired for Israel to stop their robbing, and for them to once again give to God the honor that was owed to Him. If so, God would provide all they could ever need as all is God’s and those who are His children have all that is God’s to give to us (Luke 15:31).


If God is our Father, He is not the failing, weak human that we often are disappointed by. He is the God who opens “the windows of heaven for you and pour[s] down for you a blessing until there is no more need”  (verse 10). He is the God who controls all things — He “rebuke[s] the devourer for you, so that it will not destroy the fruits of your soil, and your vine in the field shall not fail to bear” (verse 11). He is a God who is in authority of all things — including your blessings, and He gives good things to us, so that the other nations will look to us and call us blessed (verse 12). As the nations look to the Church and call it blessed, Christ, the head of the Church, is glorified.


However, I do want to make one thing clear. God does not always give us good things. Even when we are seemingly righteous, God seems to hide His face — why? I mentioned it for a short second above, but it is to strengthen us. He is a good Father, and as a good father does, He will sanctify us through suffering (as He did so often with David and Paul) to make us to be ever more reliant on Him and to find all joy in Him.


This is pertinent to the idea of the Christian family — the family of God. If our God merely was a machine we feed obedience into to receive blessings, we could not call Him Father. Yet, because He is our Father, in times, we are given things according to our obedience, and in other times, we are stricken with the realities of this fallen world so as to make us to be ever more recognizant of His grace. In either situation, we seek the Father who is enough for us. In the times of good, we see that all good things are from the Father, in times of disobedience, we see our fallen nature, and in times of questionable suffering, we see the hope of our received salvation.


We see, in God’s forgiving desire to restore the blessings of Israel, that He truly loves to bless a people who do not deserve to be blessed. If so, we must look not to the mountainous task at hand, but to the one, same God who is both offering the covenant and fulfilling the covenant through His only begotten Son, Jesus Christ. When we see the Law given to us, do we see the broken heart of the Father? Or do we see but a laundry list of to-dos?


God is wanting His children to enjoy Him. Yet, we are often too blind to learn from His careful, and patient chastisement. Let us look once again to the extent of His love displayed for the elect that they may know Him.


Consider
1. What is the first thing that we think of when we look to the Law? Is it despair? Is it dreadful boredom? Or is it an awe of God’s beautiful heart and righteousness?
2. Let us read Exodus 20, and read Westminster Shorter Catechism 45-81. Do we understand the involved commandments correctly?