Malachi 2:13-16: Marriage Defiled

May 13, 2020

13 And this second thing you do. You cover the Lord's altar with tears, with weeping and groaning because he no longer regards the offering or accepts it with favor from your hand. 14 But you say, “Why does he not?” Because the Lord was witness between you and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been faithless, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant. 15 Did he not make them one, with a portion of the Spirit in their union? And what was the one God seeking? Godly offspring. So guard yourselves in your spirit, and let none of you be faithless to the wife of your youth. 16 “For the man who does not love his wife but divorces her, says the Lord, the God of Israel, covers his garment with violence, says the Lord of hosts. So guard yourselves in your spirit, and do not be faithless.”


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

The third disputation in Malachi focuses on Judah’s profanation of the covenant of marriage, and we see that here in today’s passage. 


Malachi reminds Judah of a very important truth that we must all understand: marriage is a covenant made before God. These words have become so commonplace, and yet many of us do not know what this actually means. In verse 14, it says that God is a “witness” in marriage, and verse 15 says that God gives a “portion of His Spirit” in this union. This means that God has an active part in marriage. He is the one that joins man and woman together - not the man, not the woman, not anybody or anything else. 


Therefore, the people of Judah not honoring the covenant of marriage pointed to a deeper issue: that they did not fear the Lord. They had a complete disregard for what God had joined together and the covenant that He had made and only focused on satisfying their own selfish desires. What an arrogant and shameless deed it is to ignore the union that is filled with God’s own Spirit!


Brothers and sisters, for those of us that are dating or have any desire to date in the future, let us continually ask ourselves this question: does our relationship reflect a fear of the Lord? Or do we simply try to “cover all the bases” so that we can safely label our relationships as “Christian,” without giving second thought to what is pleasing in God’s eyes? 


And before we fabricate a million different things that we think God seeks in such relationships, verse 15 gives us a clear answer: “Godly offspring.” There is no room for our own views of what we think marriage should be because it is an institution designed by God. Marriage is to be between a man and woman, and God intends it to produce Godly offspring and grow His kingdom.  


We must understand that marriage, and by some extension dating, is not whatever we want it to be. It is a foolish thing to fantasize about marriage as a fairy tale story where we find the perfect person and live happily ever after because it can take our eyes off of what God intends for the marriage that He formed. Instead, it fixes our gaze on what we want marriage to be, leaving us just like the Israelites who had no regard for God. 


But the biggest reason that the covenant of marriage must be honored is because of what it represents. The reason that God is displeased with divorce and faithlessness is because it ruins the picture of marriage. Marriage must show God’s faithfulness and reflect Jesus’s covenant bond with His Church. 


Let us think for a second how terrible it would be if Jesus’s covenant with His Church was as flimsy as what we have made marriage to be through divorce and faithlessness. What if Jesus left the covenant because He simply wasn’t satisfied anymore or because He felt like He was simply drifting apart from the Church? Praise God that this is not so! 


Brothers and sisters, marriage is not something that we can do with as we please. All things, including marriage, must point to God’s glory and His everlasting faithfulness and goodness. 


Consider


1. What do we think of when we think of marriage? Do we think of God at all? 
2. What areas of our life do we have yet to surrender to God? Whether it be marriage/dating, career, family, or anything else, let us prayerfully consider this question this morning. 