1 John 1:5-7: Walking in the Light

May 27, 2020


5 This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 6 If we say we have fellowship with him while we walk in darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth. 7 But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Today’s passage serves as a “litmus test” for its readers. To those that are in Christ, affirmation of a true and honest relationship with Christ is given. However, to those who are not truly saved, today’s passage gives an unabashed warning of a false hope and false belief. This morning, let each one of us perform this litmus test on ourselves. 


Before going through with this test, we must know what the foundation of this test is. And verse 5 gives it to us clearly: “God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.” That is, there cannot be darkness where there is light, and the source of this light is God Himself. He (the light) exposes the sin and evil hidden in the darkness, and His holiness starkly contrasts this evil. 


Then, the litmus test in today’s passage is simply a logical conclusion of God being light. And the conclusion is this: we will walk in the light if we have fellowship with the God who is light, and we will walk in the darkness otherwise. 


John begins with those that walk in the darkness. One cannot walk in the darkness if they know the God who is light, and those that are in the darkness should thus examine themselves. What does it mean to be in the darkness? It is more than to simply walk in sin. In the darkness, it is difficult to differentiate between a normal rock and a precious stone. That is, someone who is walking in the darkness cannot see the folly in the desires of this world and cannot see the joy and beauty that is found in Christ alone. 


Let us then ask ourselves this morning if we walk in the darkness. Do we truly see the evil in chasing after the ways of this world and see the joy in serving Christ, or do we instead see Christianity as some sort of restraint for the things we want to do? Can we honestly say that we find joy in the message of Christ and have the ability to repeat with the apostle Paul: “for me to live is Christ and to die is gain” (Philippians 1:21)? 


Contrasting this darkness is the light, and walking in it. What does it mean to walk in the light? John gives us two things that accompany walking in the light in verse 7: fellowship with one another and the blood of Christ that cleanses us from all sin. 


Brothers and sisters, do we claim to walk in the light? If so, can we honestly say that we are walking with other brothers and sisters that are in the light, devoted to His kingdom? Can we say that we live as those that are dead to sin and being cleansed from it daily? 


If not, brothers and sisters, let us hesitate no longer and come before the God who is light. But for those that are walking in the light, let us give thanks to God, for today’s passage assures us that those that walk in the light are those that know the God who is light! 


Consider


1. Are you walking in the light or in the darkness?

2. For those that are not in the light, let us not hesitate and instead come before the Father this morning. For those that are in the light, let us lift a song of joyous thanks! 