1 John: Introduction
May 25, 2020

Today, we will be starting a new book of the Bible today. In Malachi we saw the wrath of the Lord burn against Israel and the love of God that still glimmered for Israel. In 1 John, we will see the depths of that love that motivates us to live a life worthy of that love shown us through Christ.

The First Epistle of John is traditionally surmised to be the letter/message of Apostle John to Christians, most likely to a certain group of people. These letters would be circulated all throughout the various parts of the Roman empire amongst the Christian churches to be read to the congregations.

The epistle bears resemblance to the Gospel of John in using similar terminologies and concepts. The divinity of Jesus is emphasized, as well as viewing His ministry on earth as being one of tremendous victory. The topics of regeneration hint once again at the need for one to be reborn in order to believe — reminding us of John 3. This letter is a proclamation of the power of transformation through the work of the living, incarnate Jesus on the cross that testified of His love.

The letter seeks to exhort the readers with the love shown in Christ, while at the same time revealing the other side of the same coin — the need for Christians to stay holy and vigilant in the “last hours”. John explicitly addresses the concerns that he has regarding incorrect teachings (such as Docetism and Gnosticism) and evil spirits that profess not Christ, but human doctrines. Throughout the letter, even when addressing these concerns that he has for the Church, John also continuously reassures the Body of the Head’s leadership and His victory that allows also the Church to hold claim in that victory. The obvious focus of John throughout the letter is the victory and completion of all work on the cross, and our response thereof that results as an effect of our knowing of such truth and changed by such truth.

1 John contains urging and encouragement to continue in the faith for the Church that was most likely going through suffering that would have pressured the Christians to turn to other doctrines or to live as hidden Christians who did not live out the Gospel they had come to believe in. Yet, though he knows that life will be difficult for these Christians, he also does not hold back from convicting the readers to the need to live out the commandments given us by God.

Please take this time to read over the whole of 1 John (it is very short) — it does not have to be examined in detail. Understanding the general structure and theme of the letter will help in analyzing it closely.

However, while reading, just highlight interesting notes or questions. Also, if there is a burning question, please email Handa (hchun@princeton.edu), we will make sure to answer it in our devotionals (or if it is really burning, we will answer immediately — let us know). 