Ephesians 1:19-23: The Power of God Towards Us
March 28, 2020

19 and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of his great might 20 that he worked in Christ when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places, 21 far above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in the one to come. 22 And he put all things under his feet and gave him as head over all things to the church, 23 which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all.

*** Please read the verses and pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

This excerpt is the second half of Paul’s prayer for the Church at Ephesus (see yesterday’s devotional). Paul wants the “eyes of our hearts” to be enlightened about several truths - these are truths that we may know in our minds but have not understood in our hearts. 

The final truth Paul mentions in v19 is the “power towards us who believe”. 

Our hearts tend to cheapen or outright ignore the magnitude of this power. It’s already hard enough for us to recognize God’s power towards nature, like when He commands the Red Sea to part. If we tremble at the demolishing power of a tsunami wave, then how much greater is the power of our God who can instantly rupture the entire sea of which these waves are but a ripple? 

Yet what Paul says in v19 is even more mind-boggling than this. That God’s power, beyond anything we can imagine, is not only towards nature, but also towards us! Do you recognize the sheer amount of power that was needed to conquer your sin-infested, prideful, perverted souls from death to life? Frankly, the answer to this question is no! While it is barely possible to fathom the power of splitting the sea, it is in fact impossible for us to fathom the glory of the resurrection power of the Godhead. Paul says the greatness of this power is immeasurable! 

Even so, through v20-23, Paul attempts to describe just how glorious this resurrection power is. Immediately, we recognize in v20 that this power is linked to the resurrection. To paraphrase, this great power is according to the might of when God raised Christ from the dead. But far more than just escaping death, Christ ascended to preeminence over all life. Paul makes this clear by writing that Christ is seated at His “right hand”. To be at one’s right hand means to wield equal authority. 

Let’s not forget that this power also is towards us. God also raised us with Christ and seated us with Christ as his bride. We have experienced an immeasurably great working of God’s power to be there. Exactly what power was needed for us to be raised with Christ?

We see this expanded upon in v21: Christ is “above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in the one to come ''. This means that Christ, after his death from which he said “it is finished”, overcame and conquered any and every authority between death and the preeminent authority of God. 

The aggregate amount of sinful powers, from apparent evils such as the ruthless authorities and kings and emperors from all of history to the invisible demonic forces that plague us in every corner of our lives - all of this accumulates to something frightening. These were precisely the forces that we once powerlessly worshiped. 

The more we understand the power of sin that once ruled over us, the more our hearts can be enlightened about the extent of the power of God towards us as he saved us, raised us, and seated us with Christ far above these things. But more than just the power that God once gave towards us through salvation, this power is still given to us now. As sin is still present in our world, and as our sinful hearts cannot fully fathom the truths of the Word, this power is what also presently opens our eyes to knowing God as we are sanctified day by day. 

v22-23 shows that it is by this power that we as the church can become the “fullness of him who fills all in all”. That is to say, Christ will fill all things with His glory, which will be brought forth in fullness through us! This can only be done by His immeasurably great power towards us and should fill us with excitement.

It is this understanding of God’s power that Paul wishes for the “eyes of the hearts” of the Christians in Ephesus to glean. Let’s not forget that these verses were part of Paul’s prayer for Christians. So let’s imitate Paul in praying for ourselves and others that God may provide us with a “spirit of wisdom and revelation” of the nature of His power, the meaning of His power, and the glorious greatness of His power - that He may let our head-knowledge of His power seep into our hearts.

Consider

1. How often do you pray for God to reveal to you just how corrupting, widespread and powerful sin is? How often do you pray for God to reveal to you just how gloriously powerful He is? Is this reality gripping the “eyes of your hearts” or is it dull and overlooked by you? 

2. Meditate on God’s power towards you over the past week, month, and year. If nothing comes up, commit to this important prayer with listening ears so that you may be encouraged by this illuminating and essential truth. 