1 John 2:3-6: Walking in the Way

May 30, 2020

3 And by this we know that we have come to know him, if we keep his commandments. 4 Whoever says “I know him” but does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 5 but whoever keeps his word, in him truly the love of God is perfected. By this we may know that we are in him: 6 whoever says he abides in him ought to walk in the same way in which he walked.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


John’s simple condition in verse 3 is a comforting assurance for those of God and a snare of complacency for those who are not of God. Many are aware that the fruit of our obedience to His commandments points to the assurance of our salvation, allowing us to “know that we have come to know him”. Yet among these people, there are those who know that they obey His commandments and know that they know Him when in reality they neither know Him nor walk in obedience to Him. 



How can this be so? Simply put, they perceive Jesus to be someone He is not and think that keeping His commandments is nothing more than the formalism of kindness, worship and church attendance. It is so saddening that there are now many “CEO” (Christmas and Easter Only) Christians - their biannual attendance is enough obedience to falsely confirm for themselves that they belong in Christ. Brothers and sisters, let us not deceive ourselves! The Church is something that we all need, but it is not the Church which saves! When John calls out false believers for being a liar, it is often the case that they are lying to themselves. These people have a wrong perception of Christ and His Commandments.


Wrong Perception of Christ 

From the apostolic age until now, people have continually been deceived by man-made images of Jesus. 


Think about Judas Iscariot. It was not obvious to any of the other disciples that he was the traitor. As a disciple of Christ, who cast out demons in his name, Judas probably thought that he knew who Christ was. Perhaps Judas pictured Christ as someone who would make him powerful or prosperous in the world only to find in anger that his earthly treasures were reduced to nothing. Whatever it was, Judas had his own perception of who Christ was and where he stood in relation to Him. 


When John wrote this epistle, he was dealing with the emerging belief of Gnosticism which claimed that Christ was only a spirit that seemed to take on human form. And today, some think Jesus is a political revolutionary while others think he is a fountain for financial blessing. Brothers and sisters, we must come to know the Biblical Christ. He is the God-exalting, wrath-absorbing Lamb of unconditional Love who takes away the Sin of the world! This can only happen if we study the Bible prayerfully and comprehensively. Selectively reading and interpreting the Bible can be dangerous. Scripture is the Word of God and thus forms a wholly unified and consistent framework for reality - does your understanding of Jesus fit in harmoniously with everything else the Bible says? 


Wrong Perception of His Commandments 

John writes in verse 4 that “Whoever says ‘I know him’ but does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him”. Brothers and sisters, let us look to what Christ said to the rich young ruler (Matt. 19:16-22). Regarding His commandments, the ruler confidently proclaimed “all these things I have kept from my youth. What do I still lack?”. Yet when Christ challenged him to give all he had to the poor and follow Him, the young ruler sorrowfully went away. Though he thought that he was obedient to Christ’s commands, upon closer examination we see that his love for Christ was overshadowed by his love for money. Brothers and sisters, do we make the same mistake? When we think that we are walking with Christ as friendly individuals, are we really just bringing down His standards of love? 


When followers come to hear what His commandments truly entail, many end up turning away. Thus, those who know Him “walk in the same way in which he walked” having understood what walking with Christ requires of them. In John 6, crowds of people ran after Jesus after he had miraculously fed the five thousand, but after hearing Him preach the truth, “many of his disciples turned back and no longer walked with him” (John 6:66). Yet some continued to follow, like Simon Peter, who said, “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life, and we have believed, and have come to know, that you are the Holy One of God” (John 6:67-69). Brothers and sisters, though Peter will come to an even greater knowledge of the Love of Christ, this is already an example of someone who truly knows who Christ is and keeps His commandments as a result.


Let us all strive to walk in the way of obedience having understood truly who Christ is and what He commands of us. Pay close attention to the instructions of Christ, speaking directly to you through the Word. Pay close attention to the walk of Christ so that you can understand how to follow in His footsteps. Pay close attention to the Love of Christ, for John later writes “this commandment we have from him: whoever loves God must love his brother”. Fellow Christians, through it all, be joyful, for as we press forth in obeying His commandments, we gain the blessed assurance that “we have come to know him”. 


Consider


1. What is it that Christ commands of you? When you hear a command like “love one another”, have you brought its standards down so as to foster complacency?