1 John 2:9-11: Love Your Brother

June 1, 2020


9 Whoever says he is in the light and hates his brother is still in darkness. 10 Whoever loves his brother abides in the light, and in him there is no cause for stumbling. 11 But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



Today’s passage has a quite compendious nature to it. John could merely say, “Those who are in the light will love his brother, those who are in the darkness will hate the brothers. However, John expands his discourse to make sure the reader understands absolutely what he means to say.


Firstly, in verse 9, we see that anyone who claims to be in the light, that is in Christ, but does not love his brothers (who are also Christ’s brothers) are “still in darkness”. This could mean two things. It could firstly mean that those who claim to be believers but do not love their fellow believers are not Christians at all. Secondly, with a less severe note, it could mean that those who claim to be believers but do not love their fellow believers are still resting in the darkness that they no longer belong.


To this, I would assert that John is probably meaning to convey both interpretations of the message. That is, those who are truly indulgent of their lack of love for their brothers and are not repulsed by their own actions are most likely truly in and of darkness. At the same time, John is jolting those who are truly believers but lacking love to snap out of their egotistical method of faith and come out of the darkness in which they do not belong.


This leads us to the next verse, verse 10. This seems to better support the second perspective and interpretation of verse 9 — because only a believer could understand it. It commands and assures that to love is the better resolution as it shows that he “abides in the light” and such love prepares his heart that there is “no cause for stumbling” (verse 10).


Only a fellow member of the Church can truly love the members of the Church. I do not mean merely like and find amiable those belonging to the Church — that is far from real love and even unbelievers can “like” those of Christian faith. No, rather I mean a genuine love that is borne out of a regenerated heart that has been bought by the love of Christ (1 John 4:19). This phileo love that is true can only be shown within the Church because the world, on the other hand, hates the Church (Matthew 10:22). Only those who love truly have the light in them.


And those who have this love to show and to receive will not stumble because they have understood love and thereby understood the work of Christ. This does not mean we will never stumble, but it certainly does mean that as long as we reside and abide in love, we will not stumble. Yet, of course, we are still sinners and as long as we live, we will stumble, but God will lift us up again and again.


Then, we hear of those who hate their brothers in verse 11. This is the identity of those who do not believe, and therefore, it is also the category that if a believer ever finds himself in it, he must run out of. Those who hate their own fellow adopted brothers are in darkness. This is something we cannot ever take lightly (no pun intended). If you are truly in Christ and know the light yet are turned back from Christ to walk in darkness, you are in danger of unrepentant sin. If you are walking in darkness and do not know where the light is, your eyes are still blind and hence not saved. Either way, you are in a precarious predicament.


If for some reason a so-called Christian hates the Church, the danger described in verse 11 is extremely severe. This person “does not know where he is going” (verse 11). Clearly, John is not talking about a physical journey, but the spiritual, but the allusion to the physical clarifies quite a bit what he means to convey. If a traveller walks in darkness, he is blinded, and therefore, naturally, he does not know where he is going.


For those who read John’s account of the Gospel, this would have immediately raised serious concerns in his mind. If Jesus is the way (John 14:9), then to not know where to go would mean utter destruction as it means the said individual does not know Christ.


It is not for a supplementary elective of the Christian religion that John wrote this urgent letter, but for a matter of the utmost qualification for those in Christ. Those who have received the love of Jesus to be called His brother must also love the other brothers and sisters called to brotherhood with Christ.

We have seen that those who know Christ must love His brother as they have been given the ability to love and have also drank of the immeasurable love of Christ fountaining forth from upon the cross. If so, do we have a fellow believer, a true disciple of Jesus — that is, we have never forgiven? Is there one we must ask forgiveness from?


Consider


1. How have we loved our fellow brothers and sisters in Christ?

2. How have we hated our fellow brothers and sisters in Christ?

3. How is loving the Church walking “in the light”?

