1 John 2:12-14: I Write to You
June 2, 2020

12 I am writing to you, little children, because your sins are forgiven for his name’s sake.
13 I am writing to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning.
I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one.
I write to you, children, because you know the Father.
14 I write to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning.
I write to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

(Number in parentheses indicates the footnote)

While clear motifs of Hebrew poetry are present such as formal parallelism or synthetic parallelism (1) and external parallelism among the six couplets, John’s address is not exactly poetry. However this does not take away from the crucial message he is trying to get across but rather better emphasizes it. Along with utilising parallelism in his address, John writes the first three couplets in present tense and the rest in past tense or in greek aorist. (2) Doing so helps John speak more meaningfully to the three demographics he addresses: little children, fathers, and young men. Also to fully grasp the significance of this message and deeper meaning behind what John is saying, we must remember John’s message from the last chapter leading up to this. Before going on, try recalling on your own what John’s message was up until this point.


From Chapter 1, John is very critical towards false claims that people may have been making. In Chapter 1 verse 6, he clarifies that if you claim to be in fellowship with God but walk in darkness, you are lying and do not practice the truth. No ifs ands or buts. Similarly in Chapter 1 verse 8, he clarifies that if you claim to have no sin, you are deceiving yourself and also do not have the truth in you. What John is saying is very important and cannot be taken lightly. Many today, even Christians, may be outraged by these statements since we are apparently “in no place to judge whether someone is a Christian” but John backs his bold claims in Chapter 2. From the start, John emphasizes how he is mainly writing in order to help us not to sin, but when we do, to turn to Jesus Christ who is “the propitiation for our sins.” Verses 12-14 are now a continuation of the message about our identity in Christ: discussing assurance for God’s people. 

This section is the only part in 1 John, 2 John, and 3 John where John writes in a Hebrew poem style. He uses external parallelism among the six couplets, changing the tense from present to aorist, to address and reassure the readers who are in the body of Christ. gravfw or “I am writing”, used in the first three couplets, takes on the definition of what he is writing right now. In the last three couplets, the aorist is used when John writes egraya or “I have written.” The past or aorist is mainly used to refer to something written previously. While the use of the aorist later in 3 John will, with great certainty, mean a reference to a previously written message, in this context it is a safe assumption to believe John is referencing his current writing in 1 John due to some key observations. The key details that should be considered are the content that is being presented and the order John presents them in. In the message that John gives, the repetition of key ideas is rather obvious and actually done with good reason, but this will be more deeply discussed when covering the demographics he speaks to. The repetition of ideas coupled with the fact that John first addresses the readers with what he is writing right now before referencing a previous work (3) gives us the ability to safely assume John is referencing his current work, 1 John. The usage of poetic devices has a greater meaning than stylistic preferences. (For more clarification on the latter statement, check the footnote) 

Now given this premise, we can dig deeper into what his message is and what impact his poetic devices have. The overarching message is primarily that His word will never cease. Not as briefly mentioned earlier, John addresses three demographics: little children, fathers, and young men. John’s usage of specifically these three groups can be understood by looking at the life of a Christian.

The first group addressed, little children, actually has a deeper meaning than most would assume. In verse 12, John uses teknia meaning “a child young in age” and in the third couplet of verse 13, paidia meaning “a child young in experience and therefore in need of training and discipline.” The straightforward interpretation is that John is talking about the physical age of an individual, but considering his poetic elements and the entirety of his message, this interpretation is rather weak. The more structured and supported interpretation that I subscribe to is that John is referring to all Christians when saying little children. In the present tense message to little children, John addresses the fundamental beliefs a regenerated Christian would hold fast to, “because your sins are forgiven for his name’s sake,” and in the aorist he provides assurance that we can be confident in God’s blessings to us “because you know the Father.” Furthermore, those who are regenerated and saved by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone are God’s children and as the book of Matthew says (4), hence we enter the kingdom of Heaven. So this assurance is not just for infants but rather all Christians.

The meaning behind John’s usage of fathers and young men is more flexible regarding two interpretations. The first interpretation that is acceptable when reading through an exegetical lens is that both fathers and young men reference all Christians just as little children. However  another interpretation, which I subscribe to, that also is acceptable when reading through an exegetical lens is that John is talking about two different groups. To fathers, John’s message in both the present and aorist is the same, “because you know him who is from the beginning.” Notice how this is the only message that is identically repeated in both tenses. Usually in scripture when repetition is used, its purpose is to emphasize what is written. (5) Fathers when compared to young men are the more mature individuals, but because they have more experience and have spent more time fighting the spiritual battle they may also be more prone to being burnt out or losing focus on what started it all. Thus John's repeated message can be interpreted as a strong message of encouragement and assurance to always remember how they have the greatest gift in the world: to know God.

Following this premise, looking at the last group addressed, young men, completes the beautiful message John writes. John’s message to young men also incorporates repetition to give off a convicting message: John is writing to them “because you have overcome the evil one” and writes “because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one.” In the aorist, John’s message assures young men who they are in Christ: strong, have overcome the evil one, and has the word of God in them. In the present, John’s message acts as a reminder to young men right now that they “have overcome the evil one” through Christ in them. The repetition specifically of overcoming the evil one marks its importance to young men who are still growing in maturity but may have zeal and vigor. Given the commonality of zeal and spontaneity or shakiness when facing difficulty in spiritually maturing men, this interpretation of John’s encouragement makes sense as an emphasis on how the battle is already won through Christ is especially needed for growing Christians. So through Him alone, we can have faith in the blessings he has granted us.

1. http://www4.westminster.edu/staff/nak/courses/BibPoetry.htm
2. The Vulgate, or principal Latin version of the Bible, translates both in the present tense. However in the LXX or Septuagint, the present tense (γράφω) or “I am writing” is used in the first three couplets and the aorist tense (ἔγραψα) or “I have written” is used in the last three couplets.
3. The normal and expected order given these tenses would be to first reference the previous work and then utilise the present tense. (i.e. “I write to you about something in the past you may have read and now I am writing to you to address something.” would make sense and is the normal present->aorist but if you say “I am writing to you to address something and now I write to you about something in the past you may have read,” given the meanings of the greek tenses, the latter would not make that much sense and would probably be translated to “I am writing to you to address something and now I write to you about that something.” (Notice how this new translation would repeat the same information in both tenses.) Hence the latter interpretation is supported by the fact that John uses repetition in both tenses.
4. “and said, “Truly, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven. Whoever humbles himself like this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.” - Matthew 18:3-4; “but Jesus said, “Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven.” - Matthew 19:14
5. An example is in Isaiah 6 when the prophet Isaiah encounters God in a vision: he hears the angels singing “Holy, Holy, Holy.” When something is repeated three times it takes it to the superlative degree so “Holy, Holy, Holy” can be translated to “Holy, Holier, Holiest.” (Explained by Dr. Steven Lawson in the beautiful film American Gospel: Christ Crucified)

Consider
1. How does John’s reassuring message relate to you?
2. Have you ever struggled with the assurance that John is trying to address?