Ephesians 2:1-3: Dead in sin
March 29, 2020

1 And you were dead in the trespasses and sins 2 in which you once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience— 3 among whom we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, carrying out the desires of the body and the mind, and were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind.



*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***




We need the Good News because we are in a bad condition.

Paul describes us as being dead before our salvation. We needed redemption for our trespasses (Eph 1:7) not just because we were uncomfortable in it, nor even because we were screaming for help in it, but rather because we were dead in it (verse 1). We were dead people with dead souls and bodies headed for death kept alive by the temporary common grace of God. We deserved nothing but the wrath and judgement of God.

Not only this, but we followed “the course of the world,” meaning we walked with the rest of the world that had fallen. The world, signifying all those who do not know God and do not follow Him, then must follow someone else — that is, the prince of the power of the air, Satan (verse 2). For all those who walk not in the way, the truth, and the life that is Christ (John 14:6), they must walk in the way of the world and thereby walk with Satan — this means that they are actively against God. In this way, those who are not the sons of God can only be “the sons of disobedience” (verse 2).

Paul goes on to describe what it means to be the sons of disobedience.

Firstly, we “lived in the passions of our flesh” (verse 3). When the Bible talks about flesh, it is not just talking about our body, as it is clarified in the next couple words: “carrying out the desires of the body and the mind”. Rather, it’s pointing to the sin nature within us that inherently cannot meet the standards of God, and not only that, but desires otherwise as we set ourselves above God. Both in our bodies and minds, we lived, or rather, were dead, separated from God’s goodness. We desired not God, but with all our body and mind, we lived out our own desires that are evil.

Secondly, we were “by nature children of wrath” — by nature! Since the Fall (Genesis 3, Romans 5:12), we were born in iniquity (Psalm 51:5), and we were individuals deserving only of the inheritance of God’s wrath — children of wrath. Not only that, but those who are born in sin, inheriting wrath, can only repeat sin and wrath, and therefore, all we produced was evil in this world, “like the rest of mankind” (verse 3).

Mankind was fallen — dead.

Yet, verse 1 tells us that we were dead (for the skeptic, this is correct in Greek as well when read in context of the entire sentence). We once were dead, but now we were alive, and Paul goes on to describe in the next couple verses how God saved us.

Though we are not, the rest of this world is dead. We as Christians exclusively walk as living people in a world full of dead people — those with spiritual life and awaiting resurrection life. You see, we have no death to fear even in this time of a pandemic disease because death for those who are alive in Christ merely means a resurrected body that will live forever in God’s goodness. Not so for those who do not believe — they will resurrect, but not to life in God, but to contempt and wrath (Daniel 12:2).

How should we respond in such a time as this? In time such as in the book of Esther when no one seems to know God, Christians need to rise up in “such a time as this” (Esther 4:14). As the Christians did in the times of pestilence from the Antonine Plague in Rome to COVID-19 in Wuhan, let’s take up their example and love others when they need it the most. We can love because we have been loved by Christ. Perhaps we have been sent home “for such a time as this”.

Consider

1. How were you (specifically) dead before you knew Christ? 

2. What brought you to know God and to be called His son/daughter?

3. How can you love the dead today?