1 John 2:20-23: The Truth

June 5, 2020

20 But you have been anointed by the Holy One, and you all have knowledge. 21 I write to you, not because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie is of the truth. 22 Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son. 23 No one who denies the Son has the Father. Whoever confesses the Son has the Father also.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


What does it mean to be “anointed by the Holy One”? It certainly sounds like a transformative experience. Simply put, a person is anointed the moment they become Christian. Verse 20 tells us that the result of being anointed is “knowledge”, and John confirms this is something Christians all have. The idea of gaining knowledge may seem vague, but it is in fact both clear and profound. It means we can only have true knowledge if we have a foundation that is rested upon truth, and there is no other truth apart from Jesus (John 14:6). In other words, the reality and the purpose of all things can only be understood through the lens of the Gospel of Christ; apart from Christ, we completely miss the bigger picture. What we can possibly know about something would be at best a sliver of its full essence. All of mankind’s greatest discoveries about our creation lead us nowhere if we have no knowledge about our Creator. 


Many people associate the anointing with emotional or perhaps miraculous encounters - these moments, though wonderful, pale in comparison to this anointing of knowledge John writes about. For this is the moment where the Holy One, who is Christ, anoints us with the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, who is God! We become born again, with changed desires, affections, and perspectives about everything, springing forth from the life-giving Gospel. Brothers and sisters, the moment we received our anointing was the very first moment we ever thought a thought that was true! And it was the first time actual knowledge ever entered our mind! 


Remember what Jesus told the Samaritan woman: “You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is from the Jews. The hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth” (John 4:22-23). Without Christ, there was no worshipping in the Spirit - Jews worshipped through knowing the Law and Samaritans worshipped to escape God’s wrath. Yet Jesus announced that true worship is coming and will consist of spirit and truth. The “anointing by the Holy One” is what provides us with the inseparable gift of the Spirit and the Truth so that we can finally live with affectionate God-worshipping hearts!


Because we have the truth, we understand the danger of liars who deny the Truth. As John writes in verse 22, “Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son”. Brothers and sisters, it is a lie to claim that all religions lead to the same God. These words come from the antichrists of the world who profess truth while denying Christ. And for further emphasis, John seals his point by bluntly claiming in verse 24 that “No one who denies the Son has the Father. Whoever confesses the Son has the Father also”. Now while this may seem obvious to the Christian, there are other subtle ways to deny Christ that are equally abominable and cannot be overlooked. 


Many heterodox Christian views deny the hypostatic union of Christ: that He is truly God and truly man. John calls these people out to be antichrists and liars, yet many Christians today brush aside these theological discrepancies as if they are no big deal. Brothers and sisters, we must affirm the humanity of Christ because human nature, which sinned, must pay for its Sin. He lived a righteous life, obeying the Father and resisting temptation not through a spiritual nature that we did not have, but through the very same resources we have in our humanity: the Word of God, prayer, and the Spirit. As a result, Christ’s human nature and righteousness satisfies the unblemished conditions needed for our atonement. On the other hand, we must affirm Christ’s deity because only in his divine nature as God could He bear the wrath of God, which is infinite in quality, and vindicate God of all the infinite glory that was stripped away by human Sin. 


So what’s the big deal about this? So long as Christ was truly God and truly man in reality, why should we care if others profess a doctrine which is slightly wrong? To answer this, we must look at the motive behind why one would hold such a view of Christ. By denying Christ’s deity, the antichrist renders his work on the cross pointless, reducing Christ to a mere “good teacher” and claiming that Christ is someone we can live up to. By denying Christ’s humanity, the antichrist turns Him into a floating spirit which informs mankind as a divine instructor as to how humans in their own power can make themselves right with God. In both cases, these heresies are seeds that grow into cursed trees which reinterprets and adds additional teachings on to Scripture. Perhaps the most common reason for denying the true nature of Christ is that it simply does not make sense to some people. The atheist would claim this is illogical and the Jew would claim it is blasphemous. Though this may seem like an “honest mistake”, behind it all is the allure to make the self, not God, the judge of what is right and wrong, what is Good and Evil. The moment the comfort of our intuition carries us away from the foundation of Scripture, we elevate our minds above our God who created it. 


This is precisely why our anointing of knowledge is so great! To the world, and in our fallen nature, placing the truth of Christ as seen through Scripture as our foundation is utter foolishness. Yet the Holy Spirit has made us realize that once we see everything through the Gospel, we truly live with clarity about everything we need to know. Are we not like the blind man, (John 9) healed by Jesus, finally opening our eyes to a world bursting with color?


Consider


1. Does it matter to you that Christ was truly man and truly God? 

2. Do you see everything through the lens of Christ? 