1 John 2:24-25: Holding Onto What We Began With

June 6, 2020

24 Let what you heard from the beginning abide in you. If what you heard from the beginning abides in you, then you too will abide in the Son and in the Father. 25 And this is the promise that he made to us—eternal life.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


It is so easy to let our guards down and assume that we would never be fooled by the antichrists of this world. Perhaps we notice movements that are clearly heretical and assure ourselves that we have no part in them. But brothers and sisters, is that not how all professing Christians think? Surely there was a time in the past where your perspective towards the Lord was unbiblical or unrepresentative of His character. Yet by grace, the Holy Spirit faithfully corrected you and taught you more about the true person of Christ. Let us recognize this and praise God! And let us not assume that our view of God is without fault. We must turn towards prayer and our foundation of Scripture alone, continuing to work out our salvation with fear and trembling (Phil. 2:12). We must humbly recognize how susceptible we are to eisegesis, which is to reinterpret the Bible with our own presuppositions. Pray earnestly that the Holy Spirit would cut away the lurking, self-interpreting, urges behind every verse that you read! In order for this to happen, we must listen to what John commands in verse 24: “Let what you heard from the beginning abide in you.” 


Brothers and sisters, are we aware about what the antichrists do? John writes this warning because it is common for antichrists, and for ourselves, to add on to Scripture. They may claim to have received special revelation from the Holy Spirit. John makes it clear that what we hold on to must be what we have heard from the beginning. This refers to the teachings of the apostles. Remember that John is writing “no new commandment, but an old commandment which you had from the beginning, the word which you have heard” (1 John 2:7). 


Clever antichrists can easily fool the Christian who does not have Scripture dwelling richly in his heart. They can take any verse in the Bible and tie it back to their own constructed theology. Or perhaps, they may seem unsuspicious on the surface as they underemphasize certain details and overemphasize others. They may even have their own explanation about who the antichrists are in 1 John 2! Consider how cult leader Sun Myung Moon falsely justifies that Jesus did not come to die:

 

People may now ask, "What about the prophecies in the Old Testament concerning the death of Jesus on the cross?" We must know that there are dual lines of prophecy in the Bible. One group prophesies Jesus' rejection and death; the others, such as Isaiah, Chapters 9, 11, and 60 prophesy the glorious ministry of Jesus when the people accepted him as the Son of God. Why then did God prophecy in two contradictory ways in the Bible? God did not know how the people would respond to His providence for the Messiah. He had no choice but to predict two contradictory results—dual prophecies, each possibility depending on human actions. We find in the Bible a dual prophecy concerning the coming of the Lord of the Second Advent. Revelation 1:7 definitely prophesied the arrival of the Lord with the clouds. However, 1 Thessalonians 5:2 states: "For you yourselves know well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night."

Now to us, we may laugh and think that this is obviously wrong - some of us could quickly refute this argument. But what about interpretations that are much more subtle or concepts we are less familiar with? We often tell ourselves “test everything with Scripture”, but how often do we do it? When you read Dinky Daily Devotionals, do you assume whatever we say about the Bible without a second thought? Do you read “Please do not blindly accept our Word as true” and assume that our cautiousness implies our correctness? 


Brothers and sisters, let us not protest that examining and testing everything with Scripture is impossible or unimportant. Certainly it is impossible by flesh alone, but consider the Person and Work of the Holy Spirit. Make no mistake, there is one true way to view Scripture. It is through the ministry of the Holy Spirit that this true Gospel abides in us (verse 24). 


Why is this important? John explains in the second half of the verse that “if what you heard from the beginning abides in you, then you too will abide in the Son and in the Father”. Thus, it is not without reason that we make sure what we were given from the beginning remains untainted; it is the very condition for abiding with the Son and the Father!


What does abiding mean? The word “abide” is mentioned 12 times in John 15 where Jesus declares himself to be the True Vine and us to be His branches. In this case, we see that we abide in the Son, through whom we have life, and abide in the Father, our Vinedresser who knows how to make us bear fruit. And the true Word, what we have “heard from the beginning”, is what flows between the vine and the branch, Christ and us. As Pastor John Piper puts it, “We are being cared for both internally by Christ’s life coursing into us by the Spirit and externally by the providences of a loving Father who knows how to discipline his children.”


Is it not amazing that abiding in the Word brings us into such an ecosystem of life? After all, as John writes in verse 25, “And this is the promise that he made to us—eternal life”! For the very idea of God abiding in us, and us in Him, is what true life is. Moreover, the very meaning of the word “abide” is to remain fixed. Thus, as Christians, we have this true life forever (John 10:28-29)! Eternal life is not a vacation home in the clouds that we enter into after death, but eternal life is what we have already the moment we are grafted into Christ, the Tree of Life. Brothers and sisters, let us hold on unwaveringly to the Word we began with, for with it, we abide in our Lord with life!


Consider


1. How has the Holy Spirit changed and corrected your view of Scripture over the years? 

2. Do you see how a truer understanding of the Word brings more life into your walk with Christ?

3. Let us pray that God corrects our misunderstandings and allow us to see new things about His Word that we haven’t noticed before.