1 John 2:38-29: Confidence Because of Regeneration

June 8, 2020


28 And now, little children, abide in him, so that when he appears we may have confidence and not shrink from him in shame at his coming. 29 If you know that he is righteous, you may be sure that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



When Jesus arrives on the clouds of glory with trumpets blowing and the earth quaking in excitement for the Creator’s exaltation by all creation, how will you respond?


Will you cower at the presence because you know not where this all-threatening, fear-inducing being is coming from? Or will you run away thinking that you need to get to your house in time to make sure no one will steal your earthly possessions? Or perhaps will you ashamedly look back on your life of miserable delinquency that failed to recognize the obviously self-evident truth of the Gospel (Romans 1:20)?


I genuinely hope that none of you will answer in affirmation to my inquisitions. I hope, in all earnesty, that you will “not shrink from him in shame at his coming” (verse 28) — that is, that you will be among the saints who are rejoicing for the coming of the Lord, for His final act in the redemptive history. When we see His might and strength, we will not cower in dread, for that has passed away with the cross, but we will have confidence in His appearance.


You see, by that time, if we were truly in Christ, we would have practiced righteousness because we know Him who was righteous. That is to say, not only were we imputed with righteousness that was once foreign to us, but now, in Him, we know what righteousness is. We have learned to enjoy and understand to be right what we once considered to be of opposition to us. We once hated the righteousness that was Christ, but in regeneration and redemption, we enjoy all that is Christ and hence enjoy righteousness. This is why we can practice righteousness that John so emphasizes in verse 29.


John is saying that those who practice righteousness are showing the obvious signs that they are reborn, and we who can identify it also have assurance because before our regeneration (that is, being born again), we would not have been able to identify it as “righteous”.


In this, us, “little children”, have the assurance of looking up to the Father with a smile and confidence that no other people in the world could claim. We are a people who look forward to the Second Coming because not only will we be resurrected, but we will join the King in His exaltation.


In addition to this assurance, however, we also feel in our passage today a prodding of a commission to go forth and live out what we have been born into.


If we have been “anointed” (verse 27), as we read yesterday, then we have to understand that there is a special calling to ministry tied to it. David was called to kingship that was destined to lead to the living out of a priestly kingship that foreshadowed the Priestly Kingship of Jesus. If we are called into that royal family along with David and especially with Jesus, the Lord of All, we are to live out that royal calling.


The royal line of kings do not choose for themselves a life that they desire. They cannot just pack up and leave their royal duties that they have been born into. (Let us ignore the British monarchy and the current events surrounding Prince Harry’s forgoing of the throne as the current monarchy is a pretense of a real royal priesthood as seen in the Bible). For us, if we have been born into the royal priesthood (1 Peter 2:9), we live out that life. Because we are other-worldly creatures of the Royal Priesthood to God, we must live out that identity.


Foremostly, we see this living out to be to recognize Jesus’s righteousness and to practice righteousness. It is a process of firstly knowing Christ, and then of imitating Christ.


Are we proud of our identity? Are we confident of our status?


If so, we will live out that identity, and we will await, with assurance and anticipation, the coming of our Lord and the glorification of our status before the Lord.


Consider


1. Are we living out our identity as little children? Not just any little children, but little children of the great Father?

2. Are we anticipating and preparing for the day of our glorification when Christ returns?