1 John 3:23-24: Commandment to Believe
June 17, 2020

23 And this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he has commanded us. 24 Whoever keeps his commandments abides in God, and God in him. And by this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit whom he has given us.
*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***
 
Yesterday, we saw how a true Christian keeps God’s commandments (verse 22). In today’s passage, John tells us what that singular commandment is: “believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another” (verse 23). 

The first thing to note is that this is a singular commandment. That is, we cannot have one without the other. When we truly believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and His great demonstration of love for us (Romans 5:8), we naturally overflow in love towards others. 

Furthermore, this is the singular commandment. It is the summary and crux of what we are to do as followers of Christ. Jesus Himself says in Matthew 22:34-40 that the “great commandment in the Law” is to “love the Lord your God with all your heart and all your soul and with all your mind” and to “love your neighbor as yourself.” 

Brothers and sisters, let us meditate on this singular commandment this morning, for from this commandment all of our actions and thoughts flow. Do we truly “believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ” (verse 23)? To believe in the name of Jesus is more than to believe that He existed, or to have some kind of intellectual knowledge about Jesus. Rather, to believe in the name of Jesus is to trust in Him alone for our salvation and hope, and to submit to Him as Lord over our lives. It is to depend upon Jesus daily, knowing that we are nothing without Him and what He has done for us. 

Therefore, let us ask ourselves again, brothers and sisters: do we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ? 

Furthermore, do we love one another? Do we love one another not just with lip service and the words that we say, but “in deed and in truth” (1 John 3:18)? Do we love one another not because of what others may offer or because they love us first, but rather because we know and trust that Jesus loved us first (John 13:34)? Do we love one another in the same sacrificial way that Jesus loved us (John 15:13), or do we only love each other when it is convenient for ourselves?

Brothers and sisters, this is at the center of our faith. We can be filled with great knowledge about the Scriptures, we can faithfully serve those around us, we can stand against the sins of racism and injustice that we see around us, but this is all meaningless if we do not believe in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and love others. 

This morning, let us return to the simplicity of knowing Jesus and His great love for us and for others. Let us clear the stage in our hearts of all other clutter and noise, and let us come to know the Lord our King. 

Consider

1. Do you believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ? 
2. Do you love one another? 