1 John 3:16-18: We Know Love
June 14, 2020

16 By this we know love, that he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers. 17 But if anyone has the world's goods and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against him, how does God's love abide in him? 18 Little children, let us not love in word or talk but in deed and in truth.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

 
Love requires sacrifice.

When we think about our feelings of being loved, very often we think of how someone chose to go out of their way, with no self-interest in mind, and do something for us— even if that was as simple as spending a little time with us when they themselves were filled to the brim with things to do. Perhaps we think of our parents who suffered so much for us to the point of their exhaustion, and yet still made time to sit down with us and hear our problems. Maybe we are reminded of a friend who was willing to spend money and time just to share in your pain or your joy so that you may feel loved.

They all took something from themselves, whether that was time or resources, and decided to use it for your benefit— without thinking about how it would benefit them.

Well, as Christians, we all know the greatest love we could have ever known. God decided to enter His creation to unite His deity with the humble human flesh to not only live a perfect life, but to die for us (Philippians 2:5-8). “By this we know love” (verse 16).

Knowing such magnanimous love of God frees us from the bondage of sin to love as Christ loved us. “We ought to lay down our lives for the brothers” (verse 16) — that means that we should not be afraid to give it all up if it means the advancement of the Church to fulfill the Kingdom call we have been called to.

John believes this transmission of love from the elect to their fellow members to be so critical because by it we can see whether or not an individual understands the love that has been given to him. He argues his rationale in verse 17, “if anyone has the world’s goods” — he is talking about the resources in life: time, money, shelter, etc— “and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against him, how does God’s love abide in him?”. John is saying that one who has been forgiven much in God’s love ought to also love much (Luke 7:47).

We once did not know true love, but through Christ we have learned what that means.

Now, if you are in a relationship with someone, is it enough to just tell them, “I love you?”once in a while, but not meet with them, share food with them, or give them help when they need it? Well, obviously not. Love requires work, and it requires commitment. As John says it here, it is something to be executed not merely “in word or talk but in deed and in truth” (verse 18).

Wait a second, why should we love our fellow church members when we were loved by God, not them? In fact, some of the church members we know are despicable! Some of them are downright rude to us and some are an annoyance. They never loved us, why should we love them? The simple answer is that they are our brothers and sisters. They have been brought to God through Christ, and we ought to remember the new relationship we have our fellow brethren. 

However, we have a greater reason for needing to love. It is because they are the Body. Not just any body, but the Body of the Head who is Christ. We are to treat them as if we are serving Christ. Jesus says in Matthew 25:40, “as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me”. When we look to our fellow brothers and sisters in Christ, we look to them as if they have shown us the love of God that we did not deserve. We come to see the depths of love realized for us, and respond to it by loving our brothers and sisters who make up the Body of our beloved Jesus Christ.

We have Jesus who showed the greatest of all loves. If so, brothers and sisters, we ought to love them as Christ loved them and we ought to do it, knowing that we are doing unto Him what we do unto them.

Consider

1. Do you actively love the Church?
2. Do we need to repent of our lack of love for the Body? 
