1 John 3:19-20: Greater Than Our Hearts
June 15, 2020

19 By this we shall know that we are of the truth and reassure our heart before him; 20 for whenever our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart, and he knows everything.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

 

How do we know whether we are of the truth? We know so by our actions toward the fellow brothers and sisters in Christ. If we are imitating the love that has been shown us by Christ, we can be reassured in our hearts that we are before God presented with a righteousness not our own.

This passage is so comforting because it says that even when our own hearts condemn us and make us to question whether or not we are in Christ or not, we have the assurance of our faith in the God who is “greater than our heart” — that is, even the heart that we cannot seem to sometimes control or manage is not far from God’s hands. We know the God who has rescued us by His power in the greatest love we could imagine.

We see that John is following a chain of reasoning continuing from yesterday’s passage. Yesterday we saw that since Jesus loved us, we ought to love our brothers and sisters. From there, John goes on to say, by seeing that our brothers and sisters love us, and by showing our love to our brothers and sisters in Christ, we can understand that we have a right standing before God. Even when it seems impossible to believe that God would somehow love a sinner like us, we have the confidence that God loves us through the more perceptible, physical Body of Christ that we see as the Church.

It is to say that when we feel like we cannot stand before God because of the weight and pain of our sins, we can look to the Church who will show us a glimpse of what it will be like to enjoy God in perfect fellowship with Christ and the Church. It is our best method of bringing heaven to earth. This is what we pray when we ask God in the Lord’s prayer, “let your will be done on earth as it is in heaven” — by loving the Church, we share the truth of the Gospel in salvation amongst each other. We need the Gospel not only when we are first saved, but every single day in our walk with God.

If the Church is the evidence of Christ’s love for us, we must understand the implications of such imperative upon our lives. Our call to love our brothers even extends to our confidence to stand before the Lord in our daily lives. It means that when we feel sinful and dry in our faith, we have a shoulder on the Body of Christ to lean on, and when others in the Body are struggling, we can also be that shoulder.

We have a wonderful and beautiful opportunity to be a light to our fellow brothers and sisters. When the Church is suffering, we can share in the pains and we can love as Christ loved us. When we feel like we cannot feel Christ’s love, we rely on the Church to help us to remember it, and when a fellow believer is struggling to believe it, we can be there to remind them through our actions of love and kind sacrifice.

God truly is greater than our hearts. Even when we cannot hold on with our own hearts to the assurance of the salvation we have received, by the Church we are shown our dependence on God. Through the Church and our falling back on the Church, we are reminded in analogy that when we do not have the assurance and confidence, we should not rely on our own hands to try to “buy back” our salvation, but to rely on God as we rely on the Church. The Church helps us to stay true in our belief that we are saved by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone by being there to remind us that it is not our own power that saves but our reliance on God that does. 

If so, let us be there for the believers when they are struggling. Let us stay up nights or forsake our earthly pleasures if it means a believer coming to once again know that they are “of the truth” (verse 19).

Consider

1. How have you needed to trust the Church sometimes?
