1 John 3:4-8: Lawlessness to Obedience, Sin to Righteousness

June 10, 2020

4 Everyone who makes a practice of sinning also practices lawlessness; sin is lawlessness. 5 You know that he appeared in order to take away sins, and in him there is no sin. 6 No one who abides in him keeps on sinning; no one who keeps on sinning has either seen him or known him. 7 Little children, let no one deceive you. Whoever practices righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous. 8 Whoever makes a practice of sinning is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

What does your struggle against sin look like? 


Oftentimes, we can find ourselves apathetic to sin⁠—we live day to day and do not think much of our “little” sins as long as we do not commit the “big sins.” We can also find ourselves discouraged in our struggle against sin. We have tried again and again to overcome certain sins, but to no avail. As a result, we give in to these sins without much hope or desire to change. 


In today’s passage, John makes it clear what our relationship to sin must be now that we are followers of Christ: we are to reject our old sinfulness and instead live righteous lives. But how are we to do so? 


First, our view of sin must change. John immediately tells us in verse 4 that “sin is lawlessness.” That is, sin is breaking the law. We cannot excuse sin as simply a harmless mistake that we make, but instead we must view it as a terrible transgression against the law and against the Lawgiver. Just as we cry out against injustice when there is someone who is not punished for their crimes, we must have the same harshness against ourselves whenever we sin. Sin mustn’t be taken lightly. 


Furthermore, all sin is lawlessness. We cannot let our own moral compass override what the Bible teaches about sin, and in doing so categorize “major” sins and “insignificant” sins. Oftentimes, we overlook the sins we commit when we speak harshly to others or think ill of another person. Whatever these “insignificant” sins may be in our own lives, let us cling to the Biblical view of sin that denounces any sin as a transgression of God’s law. 


What does all this mean for us now? We are to take a stand against sin and “practice righteousness” (verses 7-8). In verse 6, John warns that “no one who keeps on sinning has either seen him or known him.” What John is talking about here is ongoing sin. That is, those that are now in Christ are now to struggle against sin and flee from it rather than living in sin with no desire to change. 


Brothers and sisters, we are to hate, loathe, and struggle against sin. This does not mean that we do not sin completely, but rather that we are continually confessing our sins, continually being sanctified, and continually striving for holiness. That is how we must now live as followers of Christ. 


In order to understand this better, imagine that a bird lands on top of your head. You are not responsible for the bird landing on your head, but you are certainly responsible if you stand still and let the bird make a nest in your head. In the same manner, brothers and sisters, we will face temptation, but we must struggle against it and flee from it, lest it settle in our hearts and become sin (James 1:15). 


But how are we to do all of this? John tells us in verse 8 that Jesus has come to destroy the works of the devil. That is, Jesus has come to destroy the consequences of sin, and He already has for all those that believe in Him. Jesus has come to destroy the power of sin, and we see that currently working in the lives of believers. Jesus has come to destroy sin once and for all, and we will see that when He makes His triumphant return. 


Brothers and sisters, Christianity is not some kind of moral workout where we train to become better people. We do not struggle against sin by simply waking up one day and deciding that we will sin no longer. Rather, we are to abide in God and know that because of His work, we are no longer bound to sin.


Whenever we are discouraged in our struggle against sin, let us look once again to the cross, where Jesus defeated sin on our behalf. Let us reject the lie that we cannot overcome our sins, for Christ has already overcome them and His Spirit is working in us. Let us remember and declare this morning that Jesus has destroyed the power of sin, and let us sin no longer.



Consider


1. What does your struggle against sin look like? 

2. Do you have any sins that you excuse in your life or that you deem as unimportant? 