1 John 5:16-18: Sin That Leads to Death

June 29, 2020


16 If anyone sees his brother committing a sin not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life—to those who commit sins that do not lead to death. There is sin that leads to death; I do not say that one should pray for that. 17 All wrongdoing is sin, but there is sin that does not lead to death.

18 We know that everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning, but he who was born of God protects him, and the evil one does not touch him.

19 We know that we are from God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

Today, we come across one of the harder passages in the Bible. It is hard because John seems to divide sin into two different types— one leading to death and one not leading to death. Does this mean that certain sins are okay to commit? Does it mean that certain sins are unredeemable? Because John does not go into further detail about what is the “sin that leads to death”, we are left with the difficult task of gleaning from the text what this means.


Firstly, the word used for “death” in Greek is thanatos— which implies not just a physical death, but a spiritual as well. This word, though can simply mean a bodily death on earth, is often used throughout the New Testament to describe the death from sin or even the second death in Revelation. I believe that John is using the word in concordance to the other majority usages of the word— by death, we are referring to the separation from God’s goodness and love.


With this understanding of the word for death, if we have read Romans chapter 3 or Ephesians chapter 2, we should understand that all sin ultimately leads to death. Even an ounce of sin is worthy of a death sentence as we have sinned not against mere men, but against the Almighty. If so, what does it mean when John says in verse 17, “there is sin that does not lead to death”?


Well, quite simply, there is but one way for sin to not lead to death. It is when the sin that an individual commits has proactively been accounted for. Sin is a debt to be paid, and if another has paid that debt, the sin will not lead to death, the punishment for the said debt. We, Christians, know that there is such a transaction in the substitutionary atonement of Jesus. Jesus, the only begotten Son of God, was the propitiation for our sin to pay the debt we owed— not just the sins that had been committed before, but also the sins that would come later.


I believe this is what John is referring to when he says, “there is sin that does not lead to death” (verse 17). You see, John uses the singular form of the word “sin” and distinguishes the two different types of sin— one that leads to death and one that does not. Often, in the Bible, this singular form indicates the concept and object of sin, not a specific variety of sin. And therefore, he is not categorizing a myriad of plural sins into compartments of “mortal” or “venial” sins as the Roman Catholic church would. He does not use a plural form of “sins” to show that there are certain actions of sin that are categorized as leading to death and certain actions of sin that are categorized as not leading to death. Rather, he uses the singular form of the word “sin” in order to show that these are two different results of sin that are borne, not out of the differences in the action of sin, but out of something foundational upon which the sin is committed. This makes sense as John emphasizes that “All wrongdoing is sin” to show that he is not differentiating certain actions of sin, but is trying to show that some sins that are committed upon a certain foundation do not lead to death.


This foundation we know to be Christ. Those who truly are regenerate and are in Christ will not commit sin that leads to death because the debt has already been paid by Christ. However, for those who are not in Christ, their sin leads them to death as the justice of God requires.


Now, all of this is quite coherent until we look back at verse 16 and notice the word “his brother”. Who is a “brother”? Is not John talking about a believer then? Is he not saying that a believer can commit a sin that leads to death? This would contradict what I just explained above!


Well, something we must remember is that we do not know the salvation of an individual as that is something that happens within the being through the Spirit. Even the early Christians could not have known absolutely who truly was a believer or not. If a member confessed and was baptized, he was to be considered a “brother”.


This is why John even wrote this letter in the first place. Many were coming to faith now, but along with the faithful were those who were coming along for a joyride. Throughout the letter John dictates signs of a true believer. John emphasized the importance of love being borne as a fruit if one truly is a believer, and here, John is showing that even in sin there is a difference between the believer and the unbeliever.


Though John is not distinguishing different sins into categories— murder and adultery in one and lying and petty theft in another, he is distinguishing that the sin committed by a believer will look different from sin committed by an unbeliever. As verse 18 shows, those born of God will not continue sinning. This does not mean that they will suddenly become perfect, but it indicates that those who love God will repent upon sinning and look to God for that salvation he has received from Christ— the sinner is considered inculpable and hence acts righteously. The believer is in the process of sanctification, and the Church must pray for him. On the other hand, those who commit sin that leads to death will keep on sinning and the evil one will touch him to continue in the world which is “in the power of the evil one” (verse 19). Though it may sound harsh, there is no need to pray for sin for those who claim to be of Christ but live a life counter to the Gospel.


John, as he has been doing in this whole letter, is protecting the Church against false believers and their pattern of sin that may plague the rest of the Church to fall to the powers of the world. He emphasizes the need to know who we are from and how God protects us.


Brothers and sisters, I truly hope that we would not fall to the world, but live a life free from sin. When we do fall to sin, I pray that it is sin that does not lead to death— sin that is paid for by Christ. When we do sin, I hope that we would repent and be angry as to not sin again.


Consider

1. This was a harder passage to read. Have a read again to comprehend fully.

2. Are you in Christ truly? Or are you using Him as an excuse to sin?