1 John 5:9-12: Testimony of God

June 27, 2020

9 If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater, for this is the testimony of God that he has borne concerning his Son. 10 Whoever believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. Whoever does not believe God has made Him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has borne concerning his Son. 11 And this is the testimony, that God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. 12 Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


It is a great abomination that the world embraces the testimonies of men without any regard to the testimony of God. We are told by men what we ought to do and what we ought to stand for. We are swept up in lofty humanist visions and flock towards trending philosophers on YouTube. The advice and wisdom of men are many, but those which point to Truth are few. 


Brothers and sisters, we are all guilty of holding on to the testimony of men. Before we bury ourselves in frivolous banter between men, we must repent and look to God, who is. God is, and has always been, unchanging. His testimony for fullness of all time has been the same, singular testimony of Christ. It would take a lifetime to read about all of man’s empty testimonies while the testimony of God is revealed to us plainly if we simply look to Him. Is it not sinful that we take in the testimony of our self, or of man, as if it has authority? John writes in verse 9 that “if we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater, for this is the testimony of God that he has borne concerning his Son”.


If we are willing to trust the words of man, how much more must we cling to the Word of God? When someone believes in the Son, John writes in verse 10 that he “has the testimony in himself”. The testimony of God not only holds the absolute authority, but it also comes with absolute security. John writes here of the Holy Spirit, which serves as an inner confirmation, bearing witness with our spirit that we are children of God (Rom. 8:16). 


Far be it from us to ever deny the testimony of God! If we are to deny God’s testimony, we place the wisdom of man above the wisdom of God. In doing so, John writes in verse 10 that we have made God a liar, “because [we have] not believed in the testimony that God has borne concerning his Son”. How ridiculous must it be for man to call his Creator a liar? It is an act of injustice to make such a claim when God has clearly revealed himself such that we are without excuse (Rom. 1:20). Even though some do not intend to call God a liar, they do it nonetheless, and it comes from a place of sin. This attitude is not just a mere misfortune, rather it is as Spurgeon writes, “an atrocious offense against the God of truth”. Those who claim they are trying to believe only magnify the offense of their words, proving that they love Sin more than they love God. 


Brothers and sisters, let us hold on to the testimony of God without hesitation. For the testimony is simple: John tells us in verse 11 “that God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son”. Is it not crazy that our sinful hearts hack around this simple truth, trying to find fault with it? The testimony is clear and its message is urgent. It simply means that “whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life”. Let us pray that our dead and worthless world may see the immensity of the Love of God through this testimony of Christ. Let us be restless over the fact that such a testimony has been ignored by men, who without Christ, deserve nothing but the Wrath of God (John 3:36). 


Consider

1. How does your reliance on the Word of God compare to your reliance on the words of men? What does this attitude say about God?