1 John 4:19-21: Because He Loved First

June 24, 2020


19 We love because he first loved us. 20 If anyone says, “I love God,” and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who does not love his brother whom he has seen cannot love God whom he has not seen. 21 And this commandment we have from him: whoever loves God must also love his brother.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


Oftentimes, we see the countless commands throughout the Bible to love God and love others and are convicted with how we fall short in doing so. As a result, we often find ourselves trying to force ourselves to “love” more. This idea that we can grit our teeth and force ourselves to love sounds silly, and yet we so often find ourselves trying to do just that. 


We see in today’s passage that “we love because He first loved us” (verse 19). That is, we do not love out of our own determination or our own goodness. We are able to love because we have experienced this love from the Father. 


And yet, it is so easy for us to read this verse and be unconvinced. We tell ourselves that we know the love of God and we know the Gospel, and yet it still remains so difficult for us to love God with all our heart and to love others, especially certain people. 


But if we think in this manner, we must take a closer look at the love of God that we claim to know, for it is different than the love of God that John is describing here. What is the love of God that John is describing? It is the love that loved us first.


This is the love of God that loved us even when we did not love Him. This is the love of the Almighty One, the Holy One, the Name Above All Names that chose to love these creatures from the dirt that have the audacity to rebel against Him daily. This is the love of God that was demonstrated in Christ’s death for us while we still hated Him (Romans 5:8). 


Brothers and sisters, let us reflect upon the amazing and mysterious love of God once again this morning. Let us reflect upon our own sinfulness and God’s untouchable holiness, and marvel at the fact that God chose to love us despite there being nothing in us that would make us desirable. Then and only then will our hearts burn with love for God. We love because He has first loved us. 


Furthermore, we cannot experience this marvelous love from the Father and be unchanged in our affections towards others. In fact, we see in verse 20 that our love for others reflects our love for God. 


And yet, it is easy for us to conjure up excuses for not loving others. We tell ourselves that “they do not deserve it” or that “they have failed us too many times.” But brothers and sisters, is this not the very love that Christ has shown us? The very love that we now claim to know? 


Or we may tell ourselves that we are simply indifferent to certain people. We have our close friends and friend groups, but we are otherwise indifferent to everyone else. But brothers and sisters, this is not the initiating love of Christ that we claim to know and cherish!


This morning, let us examine our own relationships with others. Let us see where we fall short in loving not just those that are closest to us, but everyone around us. And when we see all of our shortcomings in loving others and loving God Himself, let us repent and once again gaze upon the wonder of love that God has first shown us. 



Consider


1. Do you struggle to love God and others? 

2. What excuses do you have for not loving others? 