1 John 5:6-8: Water and Blood

June 26, 2020

6 This is he who came by water and blood—Jesus Christ; not by the water only but by the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth. 7 For there are three that testify: 8 the Spirit and the water and the blood; and these three agree.

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



These few verses are dense with truths that we must unpack. John is writing about three things that testify Christ: the water, the blood, and the Holy Spirit. Together, they reveal to us the glory of who Christ is through the manner in which He came. 



Just the fact that God came to us is ineffable. Have we forgotten how absolute God is? In the words of John Piper, everything that is not God depends totally on God. 



In comparison to God, the entire universe is nothing. It came into being by God and stays in being moment by moment through God’s decision to keep it in being - it is utterly fragile and dependent! 



Yet the Word, who is God, who is and ever will be the absolute being, came and revealed Himself to His creation. And how did He come? Did He come in full display of His Power as the Lion on Judah? No, John writes in verse 6 that the Word “is he who came by water and blood - Jesus Christ”. Christ did not consider equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, being made in likeness of men (Phil 2:6-7). God willingly became of water and of blood, loving the dust of mankind by constraining himself to flesh. 



But when John writes of “water” and “blood”, it is more than just the fact that Christ was born into a body. They point to something bigger. Verses 7 and 9 show that “water” and “blood” are meant to be the testimony of the Son. When John writes of “water”, he speaks of the baptism of Christ. When John writes of “blood”, he speaks of the sacrifice of Christ on the cross. These things loudly testify to us who God is by the power of the Holy Spirit. 



Not only do the testimony of water and blood agree, but both are absolutely necessary. This is why John specifies in verse 6 that Christ came “not by the water only but by the water and the blood”. These words stand against the false teachings of Cerinthus who, at the time, was claiming that the “spirit of Christ” descended upon Jesus at His baptism and left just before His crucifixion. Cerinthus could not conceive that such demeaning suffering would come upon Christ. But John affirms that Christ, from birth to death, was both truly God and truly man. 



Brother and sisters, do you understand the testimony of the water and the blood? What does the baptism and crucifixion of Christ speak of? 



Even John the Baptist did not think Christ should have been baptized. John was not worthy to untie His sandal, let alone baptize Him! In the Old Testament context, baptism was an act of cleansing and purification. Because the King was coming, and the people were not ready, John the Baptist had begun to call upon Jews to renew their lives through repentance and be baptized. Baptism was something that we had to do but not something that Christ had to do. Yet John writes that Christ came by water; by this he means that through baptism, Christ’s humanity was identified with our humanity. 



The baptism of Christ is such an important testimony that when it happened, as divine confirmation, heaven opened and the Holy Spirit descended and rested on Christ (Matt. 3:16). We know from verse 6 that the “Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth”. Just like how the Spirit testified at the moment of Christ’s baptism, it continues to testify in agreement with the testimony of the water and blood today. Jesus himself explains that his baptism is important because it is fitting to fulfill all righteousness (Matt. 3:15). Not only did Jesus join us in the act of being baptized, but he also joined us in the responsibility of keeping the Law. Jesus, being of human nature, did not let an iota of the Law pass, thus fulfilling it on our behalf. Jesus is he who came by water, because through his humanity, he imputed his righteousness unto us. 



As we also know, Jesus is he who came by blood. This is the testimony of the crucifixion, the means by which Christ justified us. The sacrificial blood of Christ is what our God of Justice required because of our grievous sins against Him. Yes, we were saved through God, but we were also saved from God. As we read in 1 John 4, the blood was the propitiation that appeased God so that we could enter into a relationship with Him. The blood of Christ is the miraculous wine that Jesus provides for His wedding with His Church (John 2). Scripture now tells us that because of the blood of Christ, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus (Rom. 8:1). 



John repeats in verses 7-8 “for there are three that testify: the Spirit and the water and the blood”. Remember that in the first chapter John wrote that he testifies to things “which we have seen with our eyes” (1 John 1:1). The water and the blood were witnessed by God’s people, confirming for us the testimony of who Christ is and what he came to do. Moreover, we have the testimony of the Holy Spirit, who through regeneration, provides us with the gift of faith, fixing our eyes upon the true and living Person of Christ. 



Brothers and sisters, let the testimony of the Spirit, water, and blood minister to our hearts. For verse 8 tells us that “these three agree”. The testimony of the water is the outward cleansing and righteousness of Christ. The testimony of the blood is the human suffering of Christ that took away our Sin. Through these testimonies, we are baptized in the Holy Spirit with the “washing of regeneration” (Titus 3:5). And the testimony of the Holy Spirit is the sweetness of this water and blood. By it, we glorify God with a tune of praise ringing in our hearts!



Let the water and the blood 

from Thy wounded side which flowed

Be of sin the double cure 

save from wrath and make me pure!



Consider

Reflect on the significance of Christ’s baptism. What does it mean to be baptized in Christ? Why do we as Christians value it so much (as opposed to Jews)?

What other passages from the Word does this passage remind you of? Really meditate on this passage and try connecting it with the book of John. 