1 John 4:17-18: Love Perfected

June 23, 2020


17 By this is love perfected with us, so that we may have confidence for the day of judgement, because as he is so also are we in this world. 18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear. For fear has to do with punishment, and whoever fears has not been perfected in love.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***


What does the word love make you think of? Is it the feeling of appreciation and comfort among brothers or sisters in Christ? Or is it even the emotion-evoking romantic attraction to an individual of the opposite sex? While these two perceptions of love are not incorrect, the former being philia and the latter being eros, the love John is talking about in this Chapter is something different: agape or more specifically the love God has for man and man reciprocates to God.


The message so frequent among the evangelical church today is that God loved us so much. By no means is this message wrong but when it is the only detail mentioned, it compromises the true gospel for a feel good message and actually undermines the true beauty of God’s love for us.


Unfortunately, this uneven focus on solely God’s love leads to a dangerous and heretical understanding regarding His love towards us. If the judgement we deserve is downplayed, the message becomes that we deserve God’s love because of who we are when that is absolutely not the case. In reality, because of who we are we deserve God’s wrath but by his grace we are saved. What can be more loving than that. Now given this proper and beautiful understanding about God’s love, John focuses then on its influence on our lives as children of God. 


If we understand the splendor and magnificence of God’s love, shouldn’t it truly change us? This is primarily what the entire God’s love passage from verse 7 is about. Furthermore, when John says “we may have confidence for the day of judgement” in verse 17, he is not talking about confidence in ourselves but rather in Him who lives through us since He is the propitiation for our sins. This naturally results in His love being manifested in us. That is why the gospel message is so powerful and beautiful.


Not only is it important to realize that we do not deserve this love but also that our ability to love is because God first loved us. Hence it is not something we can brag about. To complete the entire message from verse 18, John provides encouragement in order that we do not adhere to an extreme and incorrect message. Love is not something that results out of our fear of God’s judgement but rather out of a realization that we do deserve his judgement but because of his grace, we are saved. This recognition is fundamental for a proper love of Christ and provides  clarification for those who may go overboard in focusing only on God’s wrath without his love. God’s wrath and love are codependent and work in unison to amplify his Glorious and Holy nature.



Consider


1. How has God’s love been manifested in your life?

2. In what ways does the love of God and fear of God affect your faith?