1 John 5:1-5: Overcome Through Faith

June 25, 2020


1 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves the Father loves whoever has been born of him. 2 By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and obey his commandments. 3 For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome. 4 For everyone who has been born of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that has overcome the world—our faith. 5 Who is it that overcomes the world except the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***

John begins today’s passage (verses 1-2) with a very familiar message: that those who are true believers confess that Jesus is the saving Messiah and love other brothers and sisters (verse 1). However, there is a slight twist to this familiar message on love in verse 2. Rather than stating something similar to “we know we love God when we love others,” John essentially writes that “we know we love others when we love God and obey Him.” That is, we cannot truly love others unless we love God. And we know that we cannot truly love God unless we first experience the love that He has for us. 


Clearly, loving God is at the heart of everything. But how do we know that we truly love God? John tells us simply in verse 3: “we keep his commandments.” However, it is not simply that we keep God’s commandments, but that we do not see them as “burdensome” (verse 3). 


In other words, a true love for God manifests itself in joyful obedience and submission before the Father. A true love for God means a heart that is ready to love others as we have been loved by God. True love for God is not accompanied with a begrudging and reluctant obedience; it is accompanied with a joyful devotion to God and His people. 


The question then becomes: how can we truly love God? John answers this question in the very next verse by stating that “everyone who has been born of God overcomes the world” (verse 4). That is, everyone who has been truly born again is no longer consumed by the desires of the world. Those who are born again are the ones that can truly love God and find joy in His commandments. 


Brothers and sisters, what is our greatest desire at this very moment? Is it truly to love God and to know Him more? Is our greatest desire to devote ourselves to humble servitude before the Father? Or is our greatest desire to get married, or to have a good career, or to be back on campus? Let us carefully examine our desires, for our desires tell us who it is that we serve and love. 


Finally, how is it that being born again lets us overcome the desires of this world? Because we must have faith to be born again, and it is this faith that “is the victory that has overcome the world” (verse 4). 


We may read 1 John and begin to think that everything boils down to love. We may see the commandments to love God and to love others and tunnel vision on them. However, to do so would be missing a step. We would be missing faith.


Brothers and sisters, it is faith in Jesus Christ that allows us to love Him. It is faith in Jesus Christ that allows us to overcome the world. It is faith in Jesus Christ that allows us to obey His commandments. 


It is faith that Jesus is infinitely and supremely better than anything this world has to offer that drives us to daily pick up our cross and follow Him. Only when we have faith in Jesus can we truly live in the manner of love that John has been describing throughout this book. 


So let us ask ourselves this morning: do we truly have faith in Jesus? 


Consider


1. What is your greatest desire?

2. Do you truly believe that Jesus is more valuable than anything else? 