1 John 4:13-16: Abide

June 22, 2020


13 By this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. 14 And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent his Son to be the Savior of the world. 15 Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God. 16 So we have come to know and to believe the love that God has for us. God is love, and whoever abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him.


*** Please read the verses again and try to pray through it before reading our own takes. ***



What does abiding in God look like for us?


In the past couple of verses, we have seen that this primarily looks like the love that exists between the members of the Christian community. I believe we have covered this explicitly and coherently throughout the past couple of weeks.


For today’s text, assuming that we have been following the message of brotherly love that John so heavily doses us with in his healing letter, let us focus on how this love shows the salvific plan of God in sending Jesus, the Son of God, down to earth for mankind resulting in the fact that God abides in His elect and we abide in God.


The first thing we ought to notice is that the trinity is readily present in today’s passage. This is presented to us in the light of the salvific plan for mankind: “Father has sent his Son to be the Savior of the word” (verse 14) and “he has given us of his Spirit” (verse 13). It is made clear that in our abiding in God, we show God’s abiding in Himself. To allow for the Church to abide in God, all the persons of the Godhead come together in their abiding. We show our love for the Church because we know the love of God towards us, and God shows His love towards us because as verse 16 says, “God is love” and hence each person of the trinity loves each other.


Now, let us step back and take this truth one step at a time in today’s passage. In fact, we can actually go backwards. John is writing his letter from the point of needing to love the fellow brothers (as probably that was the problem at the moment) to revealing a character of God that is fundamental to the Christian faith. What John is doing is taking the Christian action of love that ought to be a fruit in our lives and backtracking to why we need to love in the character of God. For the sake of clarity, we might as well approach these verses backwards.


So, starting with verse 16, we see that “God is love”. God is love does not mean love is God or that God is only composed of the attribute of love. Rather, it means that God is the source and the very definition of love itself. God is love because even before time began, there was a divine love between the members of the Trinity Himself. Our God, who is the God in three persons, was the only god in all the religions who can love genuinely while being completely sovereign. This love and perfect unity of the Godhead is what we call, perichoresis.


This leads us to the next section of verse 16 to verse 15 and 14. First of all, God has love for us. God loves His creation that He need not give anything to. In fact, the creation even rebelled against the Creator and sinned against the Creator, but this God loves His elect so much to the point that the Father, the first member of the Trinity, “sent his son to be the Savior of the world” (verse 14). Not only that, but that love did not go unnoticed, but God has made it known to the world so that “Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God” would have God abide in him and him in God. We get to share in the love of God that has been retained in the Trinity even before time began.


So, how does God abide in us? Well, that’s when the third person of the Trinity steps in. The Holy Spirit was sent. The Spirit was given to us that God actually abides in us, and as in the Spirit, we are sealed to the salvation by the work of Jesus Christ, we also abide in God as the Son of God abides with the Father and with the Spirit. In such a way, all three members of the Trinity act in love with one another to show love to us by the loving act of salvation.


Finally, how does this change us? How does this make us act? Well, that, in the end, makes us love the very brothers and sisters we have acquired as a result of the adoption to the Father through the Son, guaranteed by the Spirit.


In such elaborate love of God to Himself, we see the amazing love God has shown us. And from there, we see the need to love our fellow Christians. Our love for each other is not borne out of mere sentimentality, but out of the desire to express the love of God. Ultimately, even our love for each other is to worship God by illuminating God’s divine attribute.


Consider


1. How does the love of God within the Trinity impact our love towards each other?

2. How can we focus on the real love we ought to practice?